Adam Fishman (00:00:00):
Onboarding is the only part of your product experience that a hundred percent of people are ever going to touch. Good luck getting a hundred percent feature adoption of anything else in your product, right? But onboarding is the thing that you have to go through in order to use the product. It's also the first opportunity that you have as a company to deliver on the promise that you made out in the marketplace. So I like to think of your brand is the promise that you're making and your product experience is your delivery of that promise. And those two things have to be in lockstep with each other, or you're going to have mismatched expectations and some really disappointed customers. So this is the first chance that a customer has to be really excited or really disappointed in what they thought they were getting. So don't mess that up.

Lenny (00:00:55):
Adam Fishman was the first growth and marketing hire at Lyft where he spent two and a half years leading their growth efforts. Then he went on to lead product and growth at Patreon, where he spent over four years building one of the most successful and lasting created platforms out there. And most recently, he was CPO at Imperfect Foods. Today he spends his time advising companies on product and growth, and he's also doing a lot more writing.

Lenny (00:01:19):
And in this episode we cover three things, his growth competency model, which helps you hire and evaluate growth talent and also get a job as a growth person. We go deep into why onboarding is such an underappreciated growth lever and all of the impact that you can have optimizing your onboarding flow. Adam also shares a super cool framework for choosing which company to work at. Adam is hilarious and he's so full of wisdom and I can't wait for you to hear this episode. With that, I bring you Adam Fishman.

Lenny (00:01:50):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. Coda's an all-in one doc that combines the best of documents, spreadsheets, and apps in one place. I actually use Coda every single day. It's my home base for organizing my newsletter writing, it's where I plan my content calendar, capture my research, and write the first drafts of each and every post. It's also where I curate my private knowledge repository for paid newsletter subscribers, and it's also how I manage the workflow for this very podcast.

Lenny (00:02:17):
Over the years, I've seen Coda evolve from being a tool that makes teams more productive to one that also helps bring the best practices across the tech industry to life with an incredibly rich collection of templates and guides in the Coda Doc Gallery, including resources from many guests on this podcast, including Shreyas, GoCool, and Shishir, the CEO of Coda.

Lenny (00:02:38):
Some of the best teams out there like Pinterest, Spotify, Square and Uber, use Coda to run effectively and have published their templates for anyone to use. If you're ping ponging between lots of documents and spreadsheets, make your life better and start using Coda, You can take advantage of a special limited time offer just for startups. Head over to coda.io/lenny to sign up and get a thousand dollar credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A.I-O/lenny to sign up and get a thousand dollars in credit on your account.

Lenny (00:03:16):
This episode is brought to you by Linear. Let's be honest, the issue tracker that you're using today isn't very helpful. Why is it that it always seems to be working against you instead of working for you? Why does it feel like such a chore to use? Well, Linear is different. It's incredibly fast, beautifully designed, and it comes with powerful workflows that streamline your entire product development process from issue tracking all the way to managing product roadmaps. Linear is designed for the way modern software teams work. What users love about Linear are the powerful keyboard shortcuts, efficient GitHub integrations, cycles that actually create progress, and built in project updates that keep everyone in sync. In short, it just works. Linear is the default tool of choice among startups, and it powers a wide range of large established companies such as Versal, Retool, and Cash App. See for yourself by product teams describe using Linear as magical. Visit linear.app/lenny to try Linear for free with your team and get 25% off when you upgrade. That's linear.app/lenny.

Lenny (00:04:26):
Adam Fishman, welcome to the podcast.

Adam Fishman (00:04:30):
Thanks for having me, Lenny. Super excited to be here. It's a pleasure to be on chatting with you today.

Lenny (00:04:36):
It's even more my pleasure. Thank you for being here. To set a little context for listeners that don't know too much about you yet, can you spend 45 seconds giving us a little overview of all of the wonderful things that you've done in your career?

Adam Fishman (00:04:50):
Sure. I'm setting my timer for 45 seconds.

Lenny (00:04:53):
And, start.

Adam Fishman (00:04:55):
So I've been the Chief Product Officer and VP of Growth and Product at a bunch of different companies Imperfect Foods, Patreon, Lyft, the precursor to Lyft which was Zimride to name a few. Now, I do three things primarily, I'm an EIR at Reforge and a program partner, which means I create courses. I run an advisory practice on growth and product strategy, which keeps me pretty busy, and then I recently started a newsletter which was pretty much inspired by your work in this area over the last several years. Those are the three pillars of my life these days, my professional life at least.

Lenny (00:05:31):
Nailed it. Wow, that was very contained and clear. Let's plug the newsletter real quick. What's the URL? Is it fishmanafnewsletter.com?

Adam Fishman (00:05:39):
It is fishmanafnewsletter.com. I am blessed with great initials that allow me to have that name for a newsletter.

Lenny (00:05:47):
It's not obvious. Adam Fishman AF. There you go. That's the acronym. And then in terms of the advising, just to set this expectation, are you looking for more clients or are you capped out? How should people think about that as they listen?

Adam Fishman (00:05:58):
Well, I'm pretty busy, but it is a bit of a revolving door, so there's always some pipeline. So even if I can't work with folks right now, sometimes it makes sense for me to work with them a few months down the road. So always open to new interest and learning about new companies.

Lenny (00:06:12):
All right, great. We'll share how to contact you at the end of this and it will be in the show notes.

Adam Fishman (00:06:15):
Awesome.

Lenny (00:06:17):
One question I wanted to ask off the bat is, Lyft, you were there super early. I imagine it was an incredibly wild ride. I'm curious, what's the most tangible memory you have of your time at Lyft?

Adam Fishman (00:06:29):
I have a ton of memories from the almost three years that I was there, but I think the biggest one, and probably the most tactile or memorable thing was when we launched Lyft, when we were bringing it out of private beta, we had this press event at the office, which is in Soma, and it had these doors, these big huge garage style doors. And so we opened them up and we actually drove a car into the office with a pink mustache on the front of it, and then a bunch of drivers piled out of it and met the press members and were high fiving people and stuff like that. And then we also served a giant pink mustache cake at this event. So of all of the things there, that one sticks in my head the most.

Lenny (00:07:14):
I love that. I hope there was no hair in this mustache cake.

Adam Fishman (00:07:18):
No, no, there was not. It was delicious.

Lenny (00:07:21):
Okay, awesome. Another question I always have for folks that worked at Lyft or at Uber is how they feel about Super Pumped and what it is like watching that, if you've seen it, what it's like watching the story of Uber and especially working for Lyft.

Adam Fishman (00:07:35):
Yeah, I have seen it. I actually read the book first. I've been a pretty big fan of Mike Isaac, who's the New York Times reporter who wrote it. So I've been a big fan of his reporting for a long time. I connected with him a bit while he was writing the book, and I would say, there were parts of it that were painful. It was like renavigating, relitigating a history that I had lived through already. And so much of that story was stuff that I had experienced pretty regularly while I was at Lyft battling against Uber.

Adam Fishman (00:08:04):
So one part of me was like, "I remember that. God, that was hard." Another part of me was happy to see that all of the things were out in the open finally, things that were hard to talk about about competitive practices and stuff like that and just shady things. And some part of me was happy that it was out there. And then one other thing separately, so I actually was interviewing with Joseph Gordon-Levitt to be an advisor with his company HitRecord while he was filming Super Bumped.

Adam Fishman (00:08:35):
And we had this conversation over Zoom when he was on break in between scenes of filming the show. And for those who don't know, he's the guy that plays Travis Kalanick, the CEO and founder of Uber. So he did this interview with me and he was in his trailer on set, fully decked out as TK in his look with his hair slicked back. And it was really funny and also cool to see him in this context. And he is probably the polar opposite from Travis Kalanick. Obviously they're both super successful, but JGL is a really down to earth, nice, very family-oriented calm guy. So anyways, this is a funny story of my time meeting and interviewing with him.

Lenny (00:09:19):
That is amazing. Did you slip in a couple Lyft facts to help Lyft look a little happier and better?

Adam Fishman (00:09:26):
I did. We talked a bit about that journey and I asked him some questions about how he prepared for the role and stuff like that. And so yeah, it was pretty fun. We swapped some stories and stuff. So yeah, it was neat.

Lenny (00:09:37):
Fun fact, my mom wanted me to dress like Joseph Gordon-Levitt and I was like, "I should look like this guy. Wear some vests. This guy's looking good. Looks like you a little bit."

Adam Fishman (00:09:48):
I see that. I do see that. That's awesome. Way to go, mom.

Lenny (00:09:51):
Yeah. Then I'll follow her advice. Maybe I should have.

Adam Fishman (00:09:54):
It didn't work out so well.

Lenny (00:09:56):
Yeah. Okay. So transitioning to the meat of our chat, there's three things I wanted to spend our time chatting about. One is your growth competency model, which essentially is this post you wrote recently that tells founders how to hire and how to evaluate growth people. Two, I want to chat about onboarding flows. You have a lot of really interesting experience optimizing onboarding flows and the impact that's had. And then three is how to choose a company to work out. You've chosen a lot of really interesting companies and you have some cool insights around how to think about that. Does that sound good?

Adam Fishman (00:10:27):
Yeah, it sounds great. I've also chosen some bad companies in my time too, so we can talk about the good, the bad and the ugly.

Lenny (00:10:32):
Okay, excited to hear about that. So first we talked about this briefly. You've started to do a lot more writing. You have this newsletter at fishmanafnewsletter.com, and you recently wrote this really epic piece called the Growth Competency Model, which essentially lays out what to look for in a growth leader, how to hire, how to evaluate, what to concentrate skills on? Things like that. First question, just what made you feel like you had to write this? What mistakes have you found founders make when hiring and evaluating growth leaders?

Adam Fishman (00:10:59):
Yeah, so first I'm going to put up my new background here, which is my growth competency model background. For those watching on YouTube, I have a funny graphic in the background for this. So I guess the reason that I wrote this, there were a few reasons that I wrote it. One is it really felt necessary to write it. And at first it's, I don't think I've ever come across this type of canonical reference before around how to hire and plan for growth. So that's number one. I didn't think it existed. It needed to exist.

Adam Fishman (00:11:32):
Two, as an advisor and someone who has held the head of growth role many times, I get asked this question a lot. I get asked all the time about how do you hire growth people? And it's usually something like, "Hey, how do we find you but 10 years earlier in your career?" And it feels like that question is missing the first principles approach to hiring a growth person. And if you're doing that, you're just pattern matching to me. And I may not be the best person, right, or somebody who looks like me may not be the best person. So I think we're missing that.

Adam Fishman (00:12:09):
And then third, one of the programs that I'm currently creating is around growth leadership. And so I've been thinking a lot about what it takes to be an exceptional growth leader, how you hire other people onto your team and create balanced teams. And this is going to be a really important component of that program. So it was just really top of mind. So yeah, that's why I wrote it.

Lenny (00:12:30):
Let me ask one quick question and I think you were about to start answering one mistakes founders make, but I guess it's less of a question. I know this was built on another model for product management, which is really awesome. And I love that there's this growing fountain of career ladders, competencies per function. And so I don't know if there's been one that's really great for design and engineering, but I love that this is happening. And so first of all, I just want to say I appreciate that you put in the time to think this through.

Adam Fishman (00:12:54):
Cool. Thank you. Yeah, and I do think we need more of these. I think we need one for marketers, I think we need one for engineers, designers, research probably, there's probably a bunch of functions that could benefit from some canonicalized resource around this stuff. So yeah, some myths and mistakes that I think founders made and that I've made. I've definitely lived through some mistakes. A few experiences where I was hired into a company where the founder had really messed up expectations of what a growth person should be doing, what I should be doing. And I wanted to set the record straight for founders because they are the folks who hire for this and other leaders.

Adam Fishman (00:13:34):
So one example that comes to mind is, I did a very brief stint at a company called Wyzant, in between Lyft and Patreon. And the founders of that company, so Wyzant was a tutoring marketplace. It was acquired by a company not too long ago, so it's now part of a bigger learning company. And the founders of that company we're looking for what I would call a silver bullet strategy to their growth challenges. And what they really needed, and I was naive and didn't think about asking these questions or about evaluating this properly, what they really needed was to create a strategy to add on new growth loops and a system for how to execute against that strategy.

Adam Fishman (00:14:13):
If we had talked about that as part of evaluating each other, as part of them evaluating me, it would've given me a lot of confidence that it was the right hire to make. But the problem was they didn't approach it that way. They didn't ask me those questions and I was too naive to recognize that, "Hey, they're not actually evaluating this with the competencies that you would expect for a growth leader." Executing a growth strategy takes time and patience, and they didn't really have it. And overall it ended rather unsuccessfully. I helped them build this office in San Francisco, hired a bunch of folks, we actually closed down the office. I had to lay off a bunch of the people that I'd hired, including myself, which wasn't particularly fun. And I think all of it comes back to that they didn't have a really strong set of criteria on what it meant to hire a great growth person. And so if I can help even just a little bit with founders making that decision better, it'll lead to fewer mismatches I think in the hiring process.

Lenny (00:15:11):
Awesome. Let's get into it. What are the components of this model? And you can put it back up again for folks to follow along in the background.

Adam Fishman (00:15:18):
It's coming back.

Lenny (00:15:18):
It's like a TikTok.

Adam Fishman (00:15:19):
The whole thing looks like a big circle and there's four wedges in that circle, four equal parts. And I think that answer of what are the components, what should people look for, really, I'll give the PM answer, which is it depends. And what does it depend on? It depends on the state of the team and where the skill gaps are. So the goal of the competency model is not to find a unicorn human being that is an 11 out of 10 on every one of these things, because frankly, that person doesn't exist. I am not an 11 out of 10 on these skills and I have been a growth executive at many companies. I consider myself to be pretty good at the job. The goal is to create a well-rounded team so that you're hiring and balancing skills across your team and that you don't have any gaps in your portfolio.

Adam Fishman (00:16:06):
And so when you think about it, there are four main components to the growth competency model. And the four big components or buckets are growth execution, customer knowledge, growth strategy, and then the last one is communication and influence. And each of those has three really specific skills. And so to give an example, let's break down growth execution for example, which is one of the very first ones that you should be good at if you're a growth practitioner. Within this competency grouping, there's three individual competencies that are channel fluency, experimentation, and what I'd call productizing learnings. And so you can evaluate and ask questions to understand how good people are at these different things and what their experience has been with them.

Adam Fishman (00:16:54):
So in productizing learnings for example, one of the key things that a growth person has to do is generate hypotheses, learn from those hypotheses and then translate that into changes that they're making in the product. And you want to find somebody who has a track record of at least understanding how to take something they have learned that might be an experiment or something that's very NVP and turn that into something that has hooks into different areas of the product. And so that's a critical skill to evaluate. And one of an example, the overall set of competencies.

Lenny (00:17:26):
To throw in a question real quick, is one way to use this model, coming back to your Wyzant example where there's of course misalignment between you and the founder to sit down and look at this circle here and be like, "Here's where I'm strong, here's where maybe we need to hire someone to take over."

Adam Fishman (00:17:41):
Yeah, absolutely. You can almost use it as a reverse interviewing characteristic and say, "What are the competencies you, founder, CEO, care about? What's really important to you for the first person in this role? Or the expectations that you have of what I will bring to the table." And then you can be really candid about what you're good at and what you're not good at, where you're developing. So yeah, I agree with that for sure.

Lenny (00:18:06):
Awesome. I know this also plays into evaluating your performance and it could be like, "Hey Adam, here's the three things that we want to focus on in the next cycle."

Adam Fishman (00:18:13):
For sure. Yeah. It's really a good foundational framework for being really concrete and specific in the feedback that you provide someone. So rather than saying, "Adam, you really need to be more strategic." Everybody's heard that at some point and it's like, "Well, what do you mean?" You can say, "Hey, we need to work on the area of growth strategy and that means I need to see better modeling of loops out of you, better understanding communication of what those loops are." And you can give really concrete feedback.

Lenny (00:18:44):
Awesome. So we've talked about growth execution, What's next?

Adam Fishman (00:18:47):
The next one is what I would call customer knowledge. And within customer knowledge there's a set of things and really this is about data fluency and instrumentation, understanding user psychology, which is a big one, and then this idea of being able to experiment and learn over time and how you develop your narrative and your creative approach to talking to customers. I love user psychology and it's one of the things that I think attracted me to growth and to product. I studied consumer psychology when I was in college and I'm just probably would've been a psychologist if not for a growth practitioner, which is a weird other approach I could have taken in my career. But-

Lenny (00:19:35):
It's not too late to pivot.

Adam Fishman (00:19:37):
... Second career. Yeah, actually, announcing today I'm pivoting the newsletter to just talk about therapy and psychology.

Lenny (00:19:43):
Yes. This is going to be the title of the podcast.

Adam Fishman (00:19:47):
Awesome. So like user psychology, I think one of the things that people don't easily understand is that most people come to your product with an emotional frame and a lot of people want to appeal to their logical brain right away. And the reality is, don't do that. And so you have to understand the mindset that people are in. How low are their lows? How high are their highs? Why are they seeking out your product? And it often, as I mentioned, stems from some emotional challenge that they're having or something that they're seeking. And it's not because your product is the best chat bot or because it gives the best answers. There's a different thing that they're trying to solve. And only when you address that can you move on to those other things. So that's the second competency is, customer knowledge.

Lenny (00:20:34):
It reminds me of something I mentioned on some podcast recently, this tweet that one of the Collison brothers tweeted about how user research is often misunderstood in that people think you do user research and that informs what you build. And instead the way you think about it is user research informs your model of your customer and that model informs what you build.

Adam Fishman (00:20:56):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:20:56):
And the more user research you do, the more your model evolves to help you understand the customer. And that's been really helpful for me because I never thought of it that way.

Adam Fishman (00:21:04):
Yeah. I think that's a great example. Seeking the solution in a customer interview is never going to work, right? You seek to understand and then you take that away and you can think through what the model should look like and how things should change as a result. Yeah. That's great. I can cover the third and fourth competency-

Lenny (00:21:24):
That's good.

Adam Fishman (00:21:25):
... and I'll try to be a little more brief on that.

Lenny (00:21:27):
No, no. It's good.

Adam Fishman (00:21:28):
The third competency is growth strategy. And now the third and fourth competencies I would say are a bit more advanced topics. And again, remember when I said people index higher or lower on these as they go across their career, I would expect a more junior growth person to not necessarily be a 10 out of 10 on strategy and communication. These are things that you really have to work at a long time. They tend to be softer skills in a lot of cases and you learn best by either getting it very right or getting it very wrong. And so you've got to put in the time to develop these. But in growth strategy, there's three. The first one is growth loop modeling. So really understanding how you grow and where you should be spending your time. What acquires users? What retains them? What monetizes them?

Adam Fishman (00:22:18):
The second one is capital allocation and forecasting. This is basically where are you deploying either your money, your people, how are you managing the portfolio and how are you projecting that out into the future? And that's a really hard one. You have to become best buddies with your finance friends in order to do that. And so anyways, that's capital allocation and forecasting. And then the third one is prioritization and road mapping. So you have to be able to sequence the work much like in building a product, right? Building your growth strategy, you have to sequence it. That sequence has to make sense based on your growth models. You have to have the capital or the people to allocate to that stuff. And you have to be able to build a series of hypotheses in a series of solutions to test against those hypotheses so that you can learn and then productize to those learnings.

Adam Fishman (00:23:09):
And there's a lot of ways to test this stuff. Situational, behavioral, interviewing, I talk a lot about this in my post on hiring growth. There's like very specific questions you can ask to understand what people have done or what they might do in different situations. There's case studies and things like that. So that's the third one. And then the fourth one is communication and influence.

Adam Fishman (00:23:29):
And I would say, I think you probably know this as a PM, influence is one of the biggest and hardest skills to develop. It's no different in a growth practitioner and in some cases it can even be harder because sometimes people come in with a preconceived notion of what growth is and isn't and you have to change their mind. And so within communication and influence, there's strategic communication. So how do a series of experiments and a series of things that you're trying, fit into the overall picture of a bigger bet that you're taking?

Adam Fishman (00:24:06):
How do you lead a team? So team leadership is a big part of communication and influence. And then how do you manage stakeholders? And this is hard in growth because often growth can be viewed as at odds with really thoughtful and quality craftsmanship and product building, but it's not. Those things go hand in hand. And so you really have to win people over on what it means to do growth. And I would say, this is the pinnacle, right? This is the hardest one. It's a lifelong journey. It relies very extensively on understanding people and who you're talking to. And those people can be very different from company to company and the currency that they trade in can be really different. And so this one is one where you have to go back to square one and relearn who the people are that you're working with every time you step into a new role or a new company or get a new leader or something like that. So it can be really challenging and it's never done.

Lenny (00:25:03):
That component of the competency models, we're the PM of the growth PM role feels like if you were to do these Venn diagram of the two roles, feels like that's a big part of the overlap.

Adam Fishman (00:25:13):
Yep, absolutely. There's a lot of overlap between exceptional product managers and exceptional growth practitioners. I think sometimes they just use the skills in different ways. So you need to be great at product strategy to be a product leader, you need to be great at growth strategy to be a growth leader. Just what those things look like can be different between the two. But they're both required skills, required competencies to be exceptional at the role.

Lenny (00:25:38):
So just to rehash, the four categories are communication influence, growth execution, customer knowledge and growth strategy. You mentioned earlier that people often come to you and they're like, "How do we find another Adam?" And your feedback is one, how do you know that's exactly what you need? And then two, find someone that's up and coming more because it's so hard to find folks like you that are actually ready to take on a head of growth role.

Adam Fishman (00:26:03):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:26:03):
So a question for you is, one is, do you recommend founders focus on finding someone that's more up and coming and fast learning with a high trajectory? And if so, which of these components would you suggest they look for most?

Adam Fishman (00:26:19):
One of the challenges of hiring a senior person is that they're all off writing newsletters and making podcast.

Lenny (00:26:25):
Right.

Adam Fishman (00:26:25):
Not that we know anybody who does that or anything, but-

Lenny (00:26:28):
No. That's bullshit. What is that?

Adam Fishman (00:26:29):
Yeah. So I don't want to right now go back and work at a company again. I'm enjoying what I'm doing and so it's hard to get me, right? But also you don't want me, I think, when you're doing this for the first time. So I think the key there is smart and driven people for sure. Age and youth is a bit relative I'd say. So I would think about hiring somebody who you might say is less experienced in growth, but they could be very senior in another aspect of their career. You can also benefit from hiring somebody internally who wants to branch out into growth. And one of the benefits that you get from that is a lot of time they have one of those competencies really nailed already. Could be like customer knowledge. They might understand your customer base super well because they're already inside the company.

Adam Fishman (00:27:15):
So if you're going to hire a junior person, the key is, how do you help them learn? And I think if you don't know what you're doing as the founder or the leader, it's hard. You're not going to be able to help them yourself. So you've got to be willing to invest in advisors like me, outside education, mentorship, coaching, otherwise, what's going to happen is that very driven, hungry and enthusiastic person is going to run through a lot of brick walls, which is great, except they're going to miss the fact that the door was standing right next to the wall that they just ran through and you're going to end up with a lot of bricks on the ground.

Lenny (00:27:54):
Excellent metaphor.

Adam Fishman (00:27:56):
Yeah, thank you. And so I have some examples of both hiring people and moving people over in my career. So I think tangible examples are really helpful here. So when I was at Lyft, I had the privilege of hiring that young, smart and driven person a bunch of times, but one of the people who comes to mind is a guy named Ben Lauzier. You should have him on the podcast at some point. He's French, he's very nice to listen to you. He was most recently a VP of product at Thumbtack, but he was definitely not that when I hired him, he was a jack of all trades marketer working at a corporate catering startup when I hired him at Lyft. And he had nailed most of the growth execution and the customer knowledge competencies.

Adam Fishman (00:28:38):
One was, he was an avid Lyft user himself, so he really understood the product really well. And also, he was just very thoughtful about how he executed, how he experimented. He had done a lot of it and he was very skilled at pulling them off in a very small environment because he had just had to be. And those are the two most important competencies when you're bringing in a younger, earlier stage person because teaching somebody how to execute is not that fun, right? That's a hard skill. The ability to execute is something like executive function skills and things like that. If you haven't developed those by the time you are an adult, I don't know that I'm going to be able to teach you and I'm certainly probably not the right person to teach you. You should definitely get some outside assistance with that. And so I like to get those types of people that have those things if I'm hiring that generally inexperienced growth practitioner.

Lenny (00:29:42):
And the two things you said are customer knowledge and execution. Is that the two you said?

Adam Fishman (00:29:46):
Yes. Customer knowledge and growth execution. And so let me tell you an execution story about Ben really quick. This comes also down to work ethic too. So we interviewed Ben and it was a long day of interviews in a tiny glass conference room and Lyft was, I don't know, 30 people or something at the time. At one of the interview breaks, Ben had come over and he didn't have his computer and anything like that. And so he was ducking out of work to do the interview. And he actually came out of the office and he's like, "Hey, does anybody have a computer that I can borrow?" And so we gave him this old crappy Chromebook and I was like, "Why do you need a computer?" And he's like, "I have to go edit this file and do this thing and check something in at work and deploy this thing or whatever."

Adam Fishman (00:30:32):
And I'm like, "Wow, this is a guy that really knows how to get stuff done and is so much so that he's pausing his interview process so that he could go get a thing done for his company that he's actively trying to leave, but he's got this work ethic and this execution." And that really stuck with me. And he probably would remember this story if we brought it up. So the time he borrowed a crappy Chromebook laptop to do work at the job that he was trying to leave.

Lenny (00:31:00):
What are the chances that was staged?

Adam Fishman (00:31:01):
He seemed very innocent. So I think not staged.

Lenny (00:31:06):
Okay, great.

Adam Fishman (00:31:06):
But I could be wrong. But now everyone that interviews that is going to ask to borrow a laptop and-

Lenny (00:31:10):
That's right.

Adam Fishman (00:31:10):
... check in some work.

Lenny (00:31:11):
The phone call.

Adam Fishman (00:31:13):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:31:13):
"Adam, I need to fix something."

Adam Fishman (00:31:15):
That's right. So that's Ben. And then on the other side, and I'll cover this one really quickly, and the other side of moving somebody over internally, I had equally great success with that. So there was another person named Sean at Patreon who was a marketer, again, a jack of all trades marketer. And I think I have a propensity and a bias towards folks like that because that's one of the ways that I started my career was in marketing. But anyways, I moved him over from marketing to being a growth PM, an entry level growth PM.

Adam Fishman (00:31:47):
And he had a ton of the execution skills, ability to prioritize really well and customer knowledge skills as well, more so on the customer side because he was an internal transfer, so he really knew our customers. He'd spent tons of time talking to people, studying data and things like that. And he had really great fluency with data and a drive to continue improving his ability to access and pull out insights and information. And so he turned out to be really great, but just a very different profile of a person than Ben was. And here's an internal hire versus an external hire.

Adam Fishman (00:32:23):
So you can have success with both, but I think you really have to make sure that there's some foundational things that are in place like that ability to get customer knowledge and execute.

Lenny (00:32:34):
If a founder is listening and trying to decide or hiring a head of growth or a new growth person, would you push them one way or the other, internal hire versus finding someone up and coming and smart?

Adam Fishman (00:32:44):
I tend to skew more towards internal hire to be perfectly honest, because I believe in creating opportunity inside a company. I think it's not done often enough. And I also believe that helping people transition into new roles is a way to get more people into the practice. And one of the ways that can happen is if you take a chance on somebody who has demonstrated a good track record in some other aspect of your business. So I tend to recommend internal. I think you have faster time to results. I think you know what you're getting better and in much less likelihood of making the wrong hire there. So I bias towards internal hires.

Lenny (00:33:25):
Awesome. And I think partly, I feel that too because there's so much content and training for growth these days that somebody has that background in your company and is already motivated and excited and then can just learn, go to Reforge course, read certain newsletters, feels like it's a lot easier to ramp up. Except, I always feel like if you need someone for SEO or paid growth, that's a hard thing to learn. What's your take there?

Adam Fishman (00:33:51):
I would bucket that type of person into a specialist. And one of the archetypes that I talk about is this idea of the painter versus the architect versus the surgeon. And the surgeon is your precision person. I don't actually recommend hiring that as your first hire, but when you are onto something and you really need expertise and you don't have that expertise internally, yes, I think hiring externally is the right thing to do at that point because those are really specific skills that some people have taken years to learn. And I can't just teach someone SEO over the course of a weekend and expect that they're really going to get it. In those cases, I think hiring that specialist or that surgeon is the right approach, once you've got some of the foundational stuff in place.

Lenny (00:34:41):
Awesome. Great. Yeah, it feels like there's still a lot of dark art in those two specialties that take years of experience.

Lenny (00:34:49):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Tenfold and Cameo rely on Apple to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools, or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage.

Lenny (00:35:26):
Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytic cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic clickthrough metrics and instead, you turn north star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions and payments. And Eppo supports test on the front end, the back end, email marketing and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, gete-p-p-o.com and 10x your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:35:59):
This is a good time to segue to our second topic, which is onboarding. I know you're a big proponent of spending time on onboarding, optimizing onboarding. How have you found onboarding to be as a lever for growth and just what gets you excited about investing in onboarding?

Adam Fishman (00:36:13):
I love onboarding. I probably do at least an onboarding project to at least one with every company that I've worked for and a lot that I advise. The first thing I would say is, onboarding is the only part of your product experience that a hundred percent of people are ever going to touch. Good luck getting a hundred percent feature adoption of anything else in your product right? But onboarding is the thing that you have to go through in order to use the product. It's also the first opportunity that you have as a company to deliver on the promise that you made out in the marketplace.

Adam Fishman (00:36:53):
So I like to think of your brand is the promise that you're making and your product experience is your delivery of that promise. And those two things have to be in lockstep with each other or you're going to have mismatched expectations and some really disappointed customers. So this is the first chance that a customer has to be really excited or really disappointed in what they thought they were getting. So don't mess that up.

Adam Fishman (00:37:17):
And the third thing I would say is it's also probably the most motivated that someone is going to be about your product since they're typically starting their onboarding journey with you at a time where they're like, "I need this thing really badly that you're selling." And so they're really motivated, right? And so it's an opportunity for you to put some friction in place and learn a lot about them because they will knock down doors to get to your product. So that's why I think it's a super powerful lever for growth. And we worked on this extensively at Lyft, at Patreon, Wyzant, Imperfect Foods just released some onboarding improvements that we had created when I was there, which was nice to see that finally come to light. So yeah, I've done this pretty much everywhere at some point.

Lenny (00:38:07):
What impact have you seen from working on onboarding to give people a sense of like, "Wow, this is what I can get if I put some time here."

Adam Fishman (00:38:15):
Yeah. One of the things that onboarding really drives is habit formation with the product, which leads to retention. And so you should expect to improve your overall cohort retention curves by focusing on the onboarding and activation experience. I have seen companies shift their curve outward by 10, 15, 20 percentage points from making those changes, especially when you consider that churn is most likely to happen in the very earliest usage of the product. If you can get people past that hump, it's a really invaluable part of the product to work on.

Adam Fishman (00:38:51):
So I'll give you a really concrete example. At Patreon, one of the places we worked on onboarding really extensively and the onboarding experience was one of the teams that we had on growth at Patreon. We did a lot of experimentation around the earliest, what we would call product led sales now, when do you connect a human being with a creator and the onboarding experience and what is that impact and how do you connect them with the right person or with the right creator when there are tens of thousands going through that onboarding journey every week?

Adam Fishman (00:39:25):
What we realized through a lot of experimentation was the idea of connecting someone with a human being the right person at the right time would improve the first month of revenue or the second month of revenue that a creator made on the platform by 25%. Why that mattered is because the second month that you processed payments on the platform was a key input into your LTV on the platform. So by improving a creator's first and second month revenue by 25%, we were then able to improve their overall value on Patreon by an equivalent amount, which is pretty massive. Moving anything by 25% is really impressive.

Adam Fishman (00:40:09):
And so that was human intervention, and then we actually started to productize the stuff that the humans were doing. And so what is not scalable when you're using people becomes very scalable if you can replicate components of that with technology. And so that was the next phase, so we get back to that growth execution thing that I talked about and productizing learnings. That is an example of how you go from, we've learned some things by humans that have made a 25% impact to now we're building these into the product. And so that's a really good example I think, of Patreon and one of the impacts that we had on creator, earnings, retention and their overall success on the platform.

Lenny (00:40:50):
That's an amazing example, in case it's useful to a person working on the onboarding. Can you share any more about what you actually did there? You create some algorithm of this type of person, we'll connect them to a person and then you productize it. Is there anything more you could share there that might be useful to folks?

Adam Fishman (00:41:06):
Gosh, we did so much. So I'll try to pull out a couple of example. So one of the things that we did, and again, I spoke to the fact that people are really motivated in your onboarding experience, one of the first things we did was we tried to identify better who a creator was in the onboarding experience. And who they were meant how big is their audience on a bunch of the channels where they managed communities, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Discord, YouTube, et cetera. And then how engaged was that audience? It's one thing if you make crazy cat videos on YouTube and you have a million subscribers, it's another thing if every time you publish a video, all million of those people watch it, comment on it, share it, et cetera.

Adam Fishman (00:41:49):
And so we would ask creators to connect various accounts to Patreon, maybe through authoring with YouTube or Spotify or Instagram or Facebook or something like that, Twitter, and then we would pull in the data into our backend and identify people who had large followings and also heavily engaged followings, based on a set of criteria per channel. And again, this was not just like me inventing this. We had a data scientist team that we worked very closely with to figure out what was important and what wasn't in this model. And then if you were one of those people that had a high propensity for success, high potential creators, we would siphon them off from the regular self-guided onboarding and basically land them in the lap of a human being who could engage with them, reach out, get them even more excited and start talking to them about the best things to do.

Adam Fishman (00:42:46):
And then the productization of that, the best things to do turned out to be things like one of our product principles, which became opinionated defaults, which is basically making it hard to do the wrong thing when you're setting up your Patreon page and easy to do the right thing but not eliminating choice.

Adam Fishman (00:43:07):
So the creator could still make the choice to do the wrong thing. They could still set up a single tier when we knew that a three-tiered pricing model actually would work better for them, or they could choose to set up 40 tiers when we knew that the sweet spot was three to five or perhaps make their lowest price tier a dollar instead of what we recommended, which was like three or $5 entry points. So they could do all that stuff, but we made it difficult for them to do it. We put more friction in place when they were trying to change some of those defaults because we had learned across a universe of creators, hundreds of thousands of people what worked best.

Adam Fishman (00:43:52):
And so putting in those guardrails and those default things was a huge lever for us to drive the behavior that we wanted. And again, we learned that from human intervention with the right types of creators, then detecting those people and putting in the guardrails in the product themselves and making those recommendations inside the product experience. And they were pricing tier structure, how you actually write your page, all of that stuff.

Lenny (00:44:18):
Such a great example. It reminds me we had exactly the same situation at Airbnb that you just made me think about. We called it smart defaults. What was your term? Opinionated defaults?

Adam Fishman (00:44:29):
Opinionated defaults. Yeah.

Lenny (00:44:30):
Yeah, I like that. So at Airbnb we had a bunch of calendar settings when a host signs up, on the host side is where I spent a lot of my time, we had instant book, which is basically you sign up as a host and people can book you instantly. That became the default for Airbnb. And so to make that successful, hosts had to have their calendar be accurate from the beginning. And so what we got to eventually, is we tried to figure out, are you a professional host that knows what you're doing? Are you a mom and pop that's just trying this out? And then based on that, either block your entire calendar, keep it all open, or somewhere in between.

Lenny (00:45:03):
And it's interesting that it connects to your point about, and I was going to come back to this that, a lot of people think of onboarding as a conversion opportunity and it definitely is. But to your point, even more interestingly, it's a retention opportunity because in the Airbnb case, hosts sign up, they get booked for a day, they don't want to host, they're like, "Shit, what the hell's going on here? I'm out."

Adam Fishman (00:45:22):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:45:22):
And so, I wanted to ask you, how should folks think about onboarding conversion versus retention, and why is it so powerful for retention?

Adam Fishman (00:45:32):
I actually think if you're doing it right, sometimes conversion should actually decrease a little bit. So you might actually have fewer people getting all the way through successfully, but I think that's okay because a lot of those people were probably not the right people for your product, which means they wouldn't have been engaged customers, they probably would have churned. So just by the nature of actually weeding out some people, you're going to improve retention because the people who are going through are the people who are much more highly qualified. And so I think that's also why onboarding is so challenging because you have to figure out what that sweet spot is, right?

Adam Fishman (00:46:17):
You could actually reduce conversion to a point where it's not offset by improvements in retention and you'd be doing the wrong thing. So when you're experimenting, you have to look at these push and pull metrics of these opposing metrics. But overall, I find that the biggest impact that you'll have is on retaining users because you are trying to connect them to the value that your product offers and form a habit. And if you form that habit early on, they're going to stick around because they're going to get it, they're going to get the benefit of the product, and they're going to be excited to stay and then tell more people about it. So that's why I think it's a much bigger impact on retention than conversion.

Lenny (00:47:01):
Obviously retention is a longer tail metric and conversion is immediate.

Adam Fishman (00:47:06):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:47:07):
Do you have any tips for folks that are like, "Oh my God, how do I know if this conversion hit is worth retention increasing potentially?"

Adam Fishman (00:47:13):
Yeah. I think the answer is not wait 90 days to find out, right? Nobody has that time. And so what I tend to do is look at proxy metrics. So there are proxies for things like 90 day retention. As an example at Patreon, one of our proxies around the eventual success of a creator was how quickly they would reach certain dollar thresholds once they launched. And so your velocity to get to your first patron, your first a hundred dollars processed on the platform and that thing had a lot to do with how big and successful you would be, and therefore how well you would retain.

Adam Fishman (00:47:52):
And so we looked at very early signals to understand and evaluate how good someone was going to be. We also did a lot of qualitative screening in the beginning. So as people went through, we would take samplings of creators who were onboarding and signing up and launching their pages, and we would actually look at who the creator was and what they were doing. And then we would be able to run it through our model to say, "It looks like we're getting a lot of the right people going through and doing the right behaviors, therefore, we're very confident that they're going to retain better and do the right things." So yeah, proxy metrics are the key there.

Lenny (00:48:32):
Awesome. So part of this is find this leading indicator proxy metric, and then to your point, maybe build a little bit of a heuristic that's like, okay, this is qualitatively looking like it's doing the right things to our new users.

Adam Fishman (00:48:45):
Yep.

Lenny (00:48:46):
Maybe our last question on onboarding is, at Airbnb and I imagine many companies, there's this constant desire to, "Let's just redo this whole thing. Let's just redesign it. Let's start again." And my question to you is just, how much is too much on redoing, rethinking, onboarding, optimizing, micro-optimizing? Any answers there?

Adam Fishman (00:49:05):
Yeah. I would say first, I very strongly dislike the idea of redesigning something for redesigning sake. So I think that it is true that you should spend a lot of time on onboarding, and you should regularly revisit it as you learn new things about your users. So even at Patreon, we would work on onboarding and then we take a beat, we'd let it go for a while, improved, and then as we learn new things, we would find ways to fold those back into onboarding. So I find that it's acceptable to revisit when you are learning net new principles about your customers or something new about your growth model where onboarding can directly influence.

Adam Fishman (00:49:51):
So as we learned at Patreon what the right tier construction was, or the right way to talk about your Patreon page or the right way to message it in the beginning, we would go back and say, "How do we build this newfound knowledge into an experience that sets someone up for success?" But if we weren't gaining new insights, we weren't just tweaking the onboarding experience and trying to tune it in a very micro way, because the reality is, that doesn't really move the needle that often, especially once you've got it in a pretty good foundational place. And only when you discover something really fundamentally net new, will it have an outsized impact on retention or the success of early users. So don't just redesign for redesign sake, make sure there's a new hard earned insight that you've got before you do it.

Lenny (00:50:50):
Do you think at scale companies, I don't know, maybe after hundreds of people, they should have a team, like an onboarding optimization team? I find that often is true. And I guess, do you think that makes sense?

Adam Fishman (00:51:03):
Yeah. I think it's very helpful. And the reason I think it's helpful is because I do think it's easy to walk away from onboarding because there's so many other things to work on and to lose sight of the fact this is such a critical part of the experience. And I don't know how many times I've come into a company and they're like, "Yeah, we built that a long time ago and we've never looked at it again. It's been a few years, but we're really having a real problem with retention and people dropping off in the first seven days." And I'm like, "Yeah, I think it's time we take another look at the onboarding experience. Products change quite a bit. Maybe people are getting something that's different than they expect, or maybe we know a lot more that we can use to influence decisions that they make."

Adam Fishman (00:51:50):
So I do think it is beneficial to have that team, or at least a team, that part of their job is the activation experience and therefore some part of their roadmap is working on onboarding and then other aspects of activation. So it may not be what they work on 12 months out of the year, but maybe for a quarter or two in a given year.

Lenny (00:52:13):
Cool. And there's a LinkedIn post you wrote with a bunch of examples of onboarding work you've done. So we're going to include them in the show notes for folks that are-

Adam Fishman (00:52:20):
Nice.

Lenny (00:52:20):
... hoping for more examples. Yeah. Okay. Third topic, final topic is around company selection and evaluating where to work. And you have this really cool framework that I think you call PMF for candidates. Can you talk about what that is and then we'll get into it a little bit?

Adam Fishman (00:52:34):
Yeah. I somehow stumbled on that name and it just made sense because of the acronym. But I think I was really motivated to revisit this because as we know in tech there's been a ton of layoffs and very public layoffs because of the economy, the state of funding, things like that. And I don't think we're done yet. I think we're pretty far from being done. But it's really important, and I've been burned by this a few times, to put some power back in the hands of the people who are actually seeking the jobs to understand what are some criteria that are important and these are the criteria that are important to me that help you make decisions about which company I should join, assuming they'll have me. And so the PMF acronym, and we're all familiar with product-market fit, right?

Adam Fishman (00:53:23):
So in a way it's both the product-market fit for as a candidate with the company, but then also PMF stands for people, mission and financials. And these are my three criteria. They may not be yours, Lenny, or they might not be the average person on the street, but the point is that you should have a set of criteria that you are unapologetically rigorous around and you should learn how to evaluate companies against that set of criteria. First, I guess I'll tell you what by people, mission and financials.

Adam Fishman (00:53:56):
So people are these folks that I am going to enjoy working with everyday that I'm going to be able to have hard conversations with, that I'm going to be able to disagree with and work through those disagreements and feel better on the other side of that productive disagreement, for example, and get to resolutions. What do I think about my peer set, the leaders, the people below me, if that's the role I'm stepping into, et cetera. So that's the people dimension.

Adam Fishman (00:54:30):
Mission, which is critically important for me, is that if I join a company and I do my job, which often involves growing that company really big, getting a lot of customers, generating a lot of demand and retention and stuff, I want to make sure that a lot of people have a better outcome in life because of that company's existence. And I don't just mean employees and founders having a good financial outcome, which I think is important. But I also mean in the case of creators on Patreon, we were building a new way for creators to make money, which they could then use to hire people, create more jobs, make better content, and live their life in a sustainable way so that they weren't a starving artist and they weren't living paycheck to paycheck. So that's really important, the mission aspect, that's got to exist.

Adam Fishman (00:55:19):
And then the third one is, and I think really important now is this idea of financials or fiscal discipline. You've got a lot of companies who raised boatloads of money or did financial planning during the peak of the pandemic and assumed that their business was going to continue operating at the pace that it was operating forever. A lot of those companies are running out of money, they've seen a hit to demand and they've had to lay people off as a result or make really big strategic swings.

Adam Fishman (00:55:53):
There are plenty of companies that you're not really hearing about that were more conservative in their approach, that understood and were able to look into the future and be really responsible with their money. And those people are not laying off employees. And so they're not all over LinkedIn talking about it because they're not laying people off. There's no hashtag layoff for them. So that's what by financials. And so that's the PMF framework and evaluating across those dimensions is super important. I've done it two times in the last 10 to 15 years, and I've done it poorly, two times in the last 15 years. And Lyft and Patreon are two times where I've done it really well. Wyzant and Imperfect Foods are two times where I personally don't think I've done a good enough job evaluating.

Adam Fishman (00:56:41):
Any time where I've shortcutted my criteria, where I've settled for two out of three, or thought one was great, when really it wasn't, has not ended well for me, for the company, it's not that the company imploded, but I found myself out of a job or really frustrated and burned out or something like that. I already talked about the Wyzant example where we had to lay off a bunch of people because the founders expected something very different than what I expected to be able to deliver, that's a big people miss. And Imperfect Foods was somewhat similar, amazing mission, really great financial strategy, fantastic CFO, but a lot of infighting at the C-suite. And it made it really difficult for us to plan and move the company forward together because people were at odds with each other all the time and not resolving disagreements productively. And when that happens, it's hard to be a product or a growth leader because you bear the brunt of the angst that people have. So anyway, so those are a couple examples and some of the characteristics of PMF.

Lenny (00:57:57):
In the case of Imperfect Foods, what could you have done to have avoided that issue and seen if it was true PMF?

Adam Fishman (00:58:04):
I would have tried to observe the inner workings of the C-Suite a little bit more closely before I accepted an offer to join the company. I would've attended an executive meeting or joined them on an offsite. And I think, too often, candidates don't feel like they can ask for those things. And it's true, if you're entering the C-suite, you're going to ask for more stuff, you're more experienced. But I also think that's true of a junior employee. You can observe a team meeting, you can observe a product review and understand, you sign an NDA, you promise you won't tell anybody about it, but observe what is happening and the dynamics of that room. Who's doing the talking? How feedback is delivered, is it constructive? Is it antagonistic, et cetera. So you can observe and then you can also ask questions.

Adam Fishman (00:59:00):
So questions that I like to ask are, tell me about the last strategic offsite that you had as a leadership team. Where do people disagree? What was one thing that they disagreed on and where did you end up on that point and how did you get there? And I actually ask them to tell me, it's like a reverse behavioral interview question. I ask them to tell me how they navigated it, and I will ask the CEO that and really dig in on that particular set of questions. Those are the things that I do to evaluate the people dimension, which is one of the hardest, I will say. Financials and mission a little easier to evaluate, but people really require getting to know teams. So it is hard.

Lenny (00:59:43):
That's such a good question to ask. And your point is you can ask that even if you're not a senior leader, you're just ICPM joining a team. Is there anything else you think folks can do? So you said, join some offsites maybe, ask this question that you shared, any other tips for folks just to understand if the people are a good fit? Because it's pretty wild. You're going to spend so much time with these people and you meet them once in a half hour interview and then you have to decide if that's your life for the next four or five, 10 years.

Adam Fishman (01:00:09):
Well, one thing that I would say is, you're an investor, right? You invest in a lot of companies, you're an angel investor and you have the Airbnb syndicate and things like that. You evaluate companies when you're making an investment decision, right? Because you're investing a sum of money into that company. And so as a result, you do a lot of diligence on companies or read other people's diligence, something like that. When you're interviewing at a company, you are actually investing an even more scarce resource. You're investing your time. There is no way to get more time. We're all on a finite clock. You can always get more money. If you make a bad investment decision, "Okay, we lost there." Provided you didn't bankrupt yourself. Even if you did, you can climb out of bankruptcy. There are things that you can do, but time is fleeting.

Adam Fishman (01:00:56):
And so one of the other things, and this is a thing that you do when you're an investor, is you do back channel references, right? A company is going to back channel, you the employee, if they're a good company, they're going to talk, if you and I had worked together, Lenny, they might say, "Hey, let me get in touch with Lenny and see what it was really like working with Adam instead of what Adam tells me in the interview process." And you're going to do this as an investor in a company. "Let me talk to some people who passed on investing in this company. What did they see that I don't see?"

Adam Fishman (01:01:29):
And so in this case, you can talk to current or former employees who are not on the interview circuit. And because they are not on the interview circuit, their role as a salesperson in the process is greatly diminished. And they can, especially if they're not at the company anymore, give you some pretty candid feedback on what it's like to work there. So I'll give you a really good example. That was super impressive. A PM who worked for me at Patreon, who you know Tal Raviv-

Lenny (01:02:00):
Shout out Tal.

Adam Fishman (01:02:01):
Shout out to Tal, who works on this product that we're recording on right now-

Lenny (01:02:06):
Shout out Riverside.

Adam Fishman (01:02:08):
... when he interviewed at Patreon, he asked me for a list of people who I had managed in the past, and he contacted them to talk to them about what it was like to work for me. That was the first time that had actually ever happened in my career. And I was happy to share that with him. And it represented to me a great level of thoughtfulness and insight around him evaluating what he was getting himself into. And he was an ICPM and he asked that of me, who was a VP executive level person at the company.

Adam Fishman (01:02:44):
So you can do that. And if a company says no or a person says no, I think that actually says a bit more about them than anything else. If they're trying to withhold that from you. Because why would you? If I'm a great manager, I'm happy to have you talk to people who I've managed before, even people maybe who I had to let go or something like that, right? I'm confident that those were the right decisions and that those people ended up in a better place and they were taken care of with great care. I would actually make a reference of somebody who I have let go before just so that someone could get a real honest truth of what it was like working with me. So anyways, that's my take on PMF and questions to ask.

Lenny (01:03:30):
I imagine you have PMF with your current world, so maybe just to close, can you just remind folks what you're up to now and where they can find you online and also how listeners can be useful to you?

Adam Fishman (01:03:42):
First, thanks for having me on, Lenny. This was super fun. I love talking about this stuff and it was great chatting with you. So thanks again for having me.

Lenny (01:03:50):
My pleasure.

Adam Fishman (01:03:51):
There are a few ways to get in touch with me. You can follow me and communicate with me on Twitter. My Twitter handle is Fishman, F-I-S-H-M-A-N AF. And I do respond to messages provided that they're polite. And you can also find me on LinkedIn. Those are the two platforms I live on most frequently, for better or for worse. And then I now have this newsletter, fishmanafnewsletter.com. And a lot of what we talked about today are things that I am publishing in written form on that newsletter and plan to continue publishing going forward. And again, it was inspired by the work that you're doing, Lenny.

Adam Fishman (01:04:29):
So how can people be helpful to me? I think certainly subscribing to the newsletter and joining that community, telling me about the things that are challenging to them so that I can find ways of finding how they meet up with my interests and translating them into written pieces. And then if you're ever interested in exploring an advisory relationship with me or learning more what that looks like, reach out. I'd love to meet you. Advisory work is what pays the bills right now, and my kids need to eat. I probably need to eat a little less, but my kids need to eat. So reach out about an advisory relationship if you're looking for some help on growth or product or general company building. It's what I do.

Lenny (01:05:08):
Adam, you're so full of insights and lessons, and I'm so happy that you've started writing and sharing a lot of these things. Folks should definitely subscribe. Fishmanafnewsletter.com. Adam, thank you for being here.

Adam Fishman (01:05:18):
Yeah, thanks a lot, Lenny. This was awesome.

Lenny (01:05:21):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Adam Grenier (00:00:00):
One of the biggest pieces of advice I'm giving to people that are like, "How should we adjust our marketing with the economic changes and things like that?" I was like, "Start by assuming you no longer have product market fit, because you had product market fit in a different market." It's a different market now, so you have to start over. And hopefully you do, or it's pretty close to it and you just have to adjust a couple things, and you could be right back on track. But if you just assume you need to launch a new channel to fix this problem, you're going to be wrong, because your entire customer base changed, not just the next 10% of customers that you're looking for.

Lenny (00:00:34):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. I interview world class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and scaling today's most successful companies. Today, my guest is Adam Grenier. Adam was head of Growth Marketing and Innovation at Uber where he basically built their growth marketing infrastructure and the team from the ground up. Then he went on to VP of Product and Marketing at Lambda School, and most recently he was VP of Marketing at Masterclass. These days, Adam advises companies, large and small, on growth and marketing strategy.

Lenny (00:01:10):
In our conversation, we cover how to decide when to try new and emerging acquisition channels like TikTok, VR, newsletter ads, and how to go about testing them out. We get into the growth CMO role, which is an emerging role that Adam has helped pioneer, and we get into some real talk about burnout and depression and mental health issues that often come with working in tech. This was a really powerful and insightful conversation and I learned a lot from Adam both as an operator and as a human. I can't wait for you to hear this episode. And so with that, I bring you Adam Grenier.

Lenny (00:01:48):
This episode is brought to you by Whimsical. When I ask product managers and designers on Twitter what software they use most, Whimsical is always one of the most mentioned products, and the users are fanatical. Whimsical is built for collaborative thinking combining visual, text and data canvases into one fluid medium. Distributed teams use Whimsical for workshops, white boarding, wire frames, user flows, and even feature specs, and that includes thousands of built-in icons and a rich library of templates. See why product teams at leading companies call Whimsical a game changer. Visit whimsical.com/lenny to have my own templates added to your account when you sign up. That's whimsical.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:02:34):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. Coda's an all-in-one doc that combines the best of documents, spreadsheets, and apps in one place. I actually use Coda every single day. It's my home base for organizing my newsletter writing, it's where I plan my content calendar, capture my research, and write the first drafts of each and every post. It's also where I curate my private knowledge repository for paid newsletter subscribers, and it's also how I manage the workflow for this very podcast. Over the years I've seen Coda evolve from being a tool that makes teams more productive, to one that also helps bring the best practices across the tech industry to life, with an incredibly rich collection of templates and guides in the Coda Dock Gallery, including resources from many guests on this podcast, including Shreyas, Gokul, and Shishir, the CEO of Coda.

Lenny (00:03:23):
Some of the best teams out there like Pinterest, Spotify, Square, and Uber use Coda to run effectively, and have published their templates for anyone to use. If you're ping ponging between lots of documents and spreadsheets, make your life better and start using Coda. You can take advantage of a special limited time offer just for startups. Head over to coda.io/lenny to sign up and get a $1,000 credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A.I-O/lenny to sign up and get a $1,000 in credit on your account.

Lenny (00:04:02):
Adam, welcome to the podcast.

Adam Grenier (00:04:04):
Thank you. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (00:04:06):
It's my pleasure. I'm really excited to chat. So, I'm going to give a very brief overview of your very impressive career, and just let me know if I missed anything.

Adam Grenier (00:04:15):
All right.

Lenny (00:04:15):
Sound good?

Adam Grenier (00:04:15):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:04:17):
Okay, so you were most recently VP of Marketing at Masterclass, which I'm actually a happy subscriber of and I've watched many a video. Before that, you were VP of Product and Marketing at Lambda School. I don't know if that's right before, but that was something you did. Also, you were head of Growth Marketing and Innovation at Uber, which is a really cool title. And I think you spent four years there and you basically built their growth marketing infrastructure and the team. And currently you're doing a bunch of advising and exploring to see what you want to do next. Is that about right?

Adam Grenier (00:04:50):
Yeah, you hit most of the key points. I think pre-Uber, the first chunk of my career was on the advertising side, so worked in agency world. So, I kind of think of this as phase three of my life. Ads world was phase one, startup and growth world phase two, and now really just spending time helping entrepreneurs and founders and built companies and that type of stuff.

Lenny (00:05:16):
What's been your favorite phase so far?

Adam Grenier (00:05:18):
I mean all of them. I just embrace what gets thrown at me and allow it to organically happen. So, each phase has had its pros and cons and ups and downs, and so I think they've all fit pretty well into where I was in my career.

Lenny (00:05:34):
Speaking of moving and adjusting and iterating, I know you're big into improv. How serious are you about improv?

Adam Grenier (00:05:44):
Good question. Serious in the sense that I've done it for a very long time and I still do it and I try to do it regularly. Serious as in am I aiming to make money off of it and have a career out of it? Unfortunately not. There was a point in my life that that is what I wanted to do. I lived in Chicago, did Second City ImprovOlympic, a variety of different places, did quite a bit of performing, but also got into corporate paychecks early as well.

Adam Grenier (00:06:12):
And so kind of built a lifestyle that made doing improv full time probably not the best path for me at the time. And so made a pretty conscious choice early on that it was more of a hobby and if something ever came of it, cool, but if not, that's okay. It's something I keep coming back to, because it's very grounding and fulfilling in ways that work and family life and things like that don't quite hit for me.

Lenny (00:06:34):
Actually at Airbnb we had an improv teacher come and work with the PM team. It was for months. We did improv games once a week.

Adam Grenier (00:06:42):
Nice.

Lenny (00:06:43):
And played all these fun things. And I'm curious what you've taken away from improv that has helped you become better at your work?

Adam Grenier (00:06:51):
So, I think generally the whole suite of skills that you develop in improv are pretty applicable, right? Because you are getting comfortable on your feet with change, with teamwork, building off of each other, experimenting, trying new things, a little bit of everything. I think a couple of the key rules or themes of improv that I really try to hammer home with people are obviously the "Yes, and..." side of improv, which everyone's probably heard, which is in a scene the worst thing you could do is deny somebody, because you're actually just stopping progress and you're not building off of anything.

Adam Grenier (00:07:27):
So, the appropriate approach is to say, "Yes, that is true, and..." and add to it. So, if someone's like, "Hey, you have a chicken on your head," not saying, "No, I don't." Just kind of ruins that scene. Versus saying, "Yes, I do, and it's name is Sally. What's your chicken's name?" Builds on that and gives it more opportunity. And so I think that in growth in business is super important to be able to say, "Yes, I do see your idea," or "Yes, we did accomplish this and this is what we want to do next and this is how it's going to build on it," I think is super important.

Adam Grenier (00:07:59):
The other one that I think is less known or talked about is the gift of details. So, in a scene, if you give somebody really specific details about something, it gives so much more meat to be able to work off of in terms of what's coming next. So, if someone's starting a scene and they're clearly watching television and clicking through the channels and I walk up and just say like, "Oh, you're watching TV, cool." That's a yes statement. I'm not denying what they did. But if I come up and say like, "Oh cool, you're watching TV. Is that an Alf episode? I haven't seen Alf since I was a kid. It reminds me this one time I actually ate my own cat."

Adam Grenier (00:08:39):
Just giving those specific details of Alf and me as a kid and I had a cat, which if people don't know Alf, he ate cats.

Lenny (00:08:48):
I don't remember that. I remember Alf, but I don't remember he ate cats.

Adam Grenier (00:08:51):
He was always trying to get the family cat. So, those kinds of details add a ton of value and you take that into the business world, to use Masterclass for instance, if I say, "Yeah, Masterclass, we've got this way to build content that is both entertainment and education," that's interesting. But if I say, "We create content that is both education and entertainment to solve people's deep curiosities in the way that maybe a biography would." That just opens up the exact problem that you're trying to solve. What are other alternatives to that problem? How are people consuming that? So, I think the gift of details in good improv and learning those skills is something that I really value and look for in every aspect of my business life as well.

Lenny (00:09:41):
It sounds like it's really helpful, one, in marketing, creativity and positioning, and things like that you just described. Have you found it also to be helpful in collaboration like this "Yes, and..." piece? I'm curious, is there an example or story where you like "Yes, and..." someone? Do you actually say "Yes, and..." in a meeting? How do you actually find that you use it?

Adam Grenier (00:09:58):
I hear it every now and then. I don't usually literally say it. I think one of the areas that I've found it to be valuable is when you've got cross-functional work. So, obviously at Uber we dealt with city teams a lot, and so a lot of the times the way that the central team would scope a problem versus a local team would scope a problem, would almost feel at odds with each other. And if you approach it with that "Yes, and...", it's often still true.

Adam Grenier (00:10:24):
It's like, oh, both of these things can be true at once. You could have a different goal than I have, or you have a system problem local to you that is important to you and it's not important to me. That's okay, both things can exist. So, now that we accept both and can work off of each other, we're more likely to build both a better rapport and energy among ourselves because we're not just saying, "No, no, no, no, you're wrong. That's not true, that's not important to the business. Why are you doing that?" That type of energy when cross-functional work, it just kills the scene, it kills that progress. And then you don't build relationships, you don't build the right solutions, all that type of stuff.

Lenny (00:11:06):
It sounds really good. Everyone in theory wants to be really good at this. And I imagine just doing a bunch of improv is a really good way to get better at not getting defensive and being like, "Yes. And how do we make this idea better?" Is there something you can advise folks to work on this skill, or is it just do a bunch of improv classes and it'll kind of help build that skill?

Adam Grenier (00:11:25):
That's one. I would say that I'll say that all the time to people, "Do some improv classes." And I get a lot of people like, "No, I'm not funny," or, "I don't want to do improv." And I think it's still a really great class to take, even if you have zero interest in doing improv, or public speaking, or any of that kind of stuff. Because, again, improv 101 is taught everywhere. Every city has it somewhere, and it's rarely ever people that are trying to do improv professionally. It's all games, like you said. The classes that you all did at Airbnb is what improv 101 is, right?

Adam Grenier (00:12:00):
It's just like, "Hey, let's just have fun. Let's just get out of our skin," and things like that. So, I do think everybody should take improv classes. I think it's also something with a lot of goals or skills that you want to develop, I think being really public and open about you wanting to develop that. So, if you are managing a team and you want to sharpen the skills, make it a team goal, or have accountability and just say, "Hey guys, I know that I've been pushing back on things lately. I want to really try to embrace and grow off of ideas better, hold me accountable, call me out and be like, 'Adam, "Yes, and..." this please."

Adam Grenier (00:12:32):
Or giving people permission to push back on that when it doesn't happen, I think also just opens the door for more productive conversations with people and the ability to hold yourself accountable and keep trying it.

Lenny (00:12:47):
I love that. And such a good team bonding activity. There's like all these reasons to do this as a team. My wife actually, she's a designer, artist, writer, illustrator kind of person, and she's been taking a lot of these sorts of classes to help inspire her creativity. She never wants to be an improv person, she did stand up classes.

Adam Grenier (00:13:03):
That's awesome.

Lenny (00:13:05):
As you said, it just helps you get the juices flowing along these lines. Okay, so we're not going to talk about improv the whole time.

Adam Grenier (00:13:13):
We could if you want to.

Lenny (00:13:15):
We could. Throw me word, let's go. No, we don't want to do that. So, there's basically three things I really wanted to chat about with you. One is how to decide when to invest in an emerging acquisition channel like TikTok, VR, Clubhouse was a big thing. You have some really interesting thoughts on how to decide and approach this thing. To the growth CMR role, which is kind of this, I think emerging role, something you're really good at, and I just want to get your thoughts on what's happening there. And then, three, some real talk on burnout and depression that often comes with working in tech and stuff that we go through. Does that sound good?

Adam Grenier (00:13:51):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:13:51):
Okay, great. So, to start with in the first topic, if you think about it just every company essentially goes through this kind of S-curve of growth. They start slow, they find something that's working, then hopefully it works out and things start to grow, grow, grow, and then eventually it flattens out and you see this S-curve that happens. And every company is always trying to find the next S-curve to add this layer on the cake that keeps overall growth up while this first growth channel slows.

Lenny (00:14:18):
And so people are always looking for what's the next thing? "Oh man, Clubhouse is coming out. We should get on Clubhouse." "Oh, TikTok is so hot, we've got to run some TikTok ads." And there's always something new, like newsletter ads, I don't know, podcast ads, if that's new. And you have a really interesting framework for how to think about this and make decisions and experiment. So, I'd love to hear insights there.

Adam Grenier (00:14:38):
So, the exploring emerging channels framework that I'll take, either my teams or companies that I'm advising through, has three core ingredients that I like to spend time with. So, the first is really understanding if there is an overlap between what the customers need is, what your company's goals are, and what the channel actually does really well. So, the example I've used in the past is Spotify in the moment of things like Clubhouse and Paparazzi and stuff like that becoming really popular.

Adam Grenier (00:15:14):
Well, for Spotify, they're trying to get more people to consume music and be entertained by music and things like that. And it's all audio driven. And so their growth goals are probably around new customers or deeper engagement with audio. The customer's needs are discovery and more ways to maybe have deeper relationships with their music. If you're a jazz fan, can you learn new jazz artists or more about the artists that you love? Things like that. And then take those two channels. If you take something like Clubhouse, it's audio first, it's almost like live podcast radio type feel to it.

Adam Grenier (00:15:57):
You can get into these rooms with just people with really amazing esoteric knowledge about something. And so its strengths have a really clean overlap to me with the goals of Spotify, the needs of the customer and the strengths of that. And so that to me is great. That is probably a green light in terms of is it even worth our time? Versus Paparazzi is very photo driven and nothing really to do with music or anything like that. And so it's like even though Paparazzi might have become the best biggest channel ever, is that the thing you should be putting your time into? It would be a yellow light for me at best.

Lenny (00:16:36):
And how did you describe that again? It's the medium matches?

Adam Grenier (00:16:40):
Yeah, the strengths of the medium. So, let's take influencer right now. Actually two of the channels that a lot of people are talking about right now are streaming TV or OTT and influencer marketing. And so to me, one of the strengths of influencer marketing is hyper targeted contextual marketing. And so I can go find the five influencers that are hardcore Alf fans, and if I'm marketing Alf something, great, I can go find that specific thing. Whereas OTTs a lot harder to get that specific.

Adam Grenier (00:17:16):
OTT strength is broad reach and video storytelling and that type of stuff. So, it's like, okay, well maybe my medium is if I'm Masterclass and I have a ton of video content and storytelling and things like that, that channel actually makes a ton of sense probably. So, it's like what are the strengths of that channel is something that... that is actually probably the piece I see people ignore the most, which is they just want to know if a channel is hot or not. And this gets especially hairy in this world of a lot of B2B doing more consumer-esque marketing. There's so many B2B companies that just don't apply to emerging consumer channels.

Adam Grenier (00:18:00):
And it's just like, please just stop. I don't need a Notion Clubhouse channel this week. And maybe there's a world to do that. But I think that's kind of number one, is making sure that there's even a reason that you should be there to put it on your radar right now.

Lenny (00:18:19):
Awesome. What does the OTT stand for by the way?

Adam Grenier (00:18:22):
Oh my gosh, you're putting it on the spot.

Lenny (00:18:24):
It's all good.

Adam Grenier (00:18:25):
I'm drawing a blank on it.

Lenny (00:18:26):
But essentially it's a streaming platform?

Adam Grenier (00:18:28):
Over the top. Over the top. So, instead of it being cable TV, it's coming from a box. So, it's primarily if you think of ads on Amazon or Hulu or even if you go to cnn.com and you start streaming and you get an ad first. it's basically video ads, but a lot of them now are happening on televisions and on streaming services rather than just on websites.

Lenny (00:18:55):
Got it. Okay, cool. So, the first is the strength of the channel. You should look at that.

Adam Grenier (00:18:59):
Yep. And how that overlaps with your customer and your business needs. The second is the channel DNA. And so this is looking at things like where are they in their trajectory? So, Clubhouse is actually a perfect example, because in a weird way, so Clubhouse got hot before Facebook got cold. And I was pretty amazed how many more people were trying to crack Clubhouse than TikTok, because TikTok hadn't really released their ads solution yet, but neither had Clubhouse. But everybody was talking about Clubhouse, and TikTok is very clearly not going away anytime soon, where Clubhouse hopefully won't. Like this is an amazing product.

Adam Grenier (00:19:41):
I really enjoyed it and loved it, but it was clearly very early, very quickly at that point of hotness where everyone was just kind of, "That's the reason I should be there." And part of this reason is to accept the risks of going into that channel. So, if I go and dedicate two quarters of work to Clubhouse, I need to accept that they are so early in this curve that there's a good chance this is a once in a lifetime opportunity and it'll be over. It's not a repeatable action. It also is important because if you get something to work on a channel that's earlier in their growth curve, the likelihood that they will change is very high.

Adam Grenier (00:20:23):
You're going to need to commit a lot of cycles to keep it going, because it's like, "Okay, well, their product is going to evolve drastically very quickly over the next two years." And so a really great example is Facebook early... I was at Zoosk. And so Zoozk and companies like Zynga got tons of their early growth because of notifications on Facebook, which was one of their early features, which allowed basically anybody that took any action on Zynga, it would post on everybody else's page that you got 10 carrots, and that was a huge growth lever.

Adam Grenier (00:20:59):
But then Facebook just pulled the plug on that. And so it's like, well, if you put all of your energy into that and that's it, it was pretty clear that that was still an area that's like this may not last forever. The last thing on the channel DNA that I like to look at that's a little bit more, I don't know if odd or unusual is the right term, is I like to spend a lot of time thinking about how they monetize. What is the monetization strategy of the channel? And the reason is because if you, as a business, can match or support their monetization strategy, it actually gives you a really interesting leg up with that channel.

Adam Grenier (00:21:37):
Because the likelihood of you being able to call them up and go do custom stuff with them, or partner with them, or that your solutions will actually stick around for a while, it'd go up pretty drastically. And so my key example of this was with when Facebook started exploring mobile ads, Hotel Tonight, we were one of the alpha testers of mobile ads, because I'd been sitting here buying ad inventory on networks for the last five or six years and just waiting for Facebook to work, because it just wasn't really working for mobile installs.

Adam Grenier (00:22:13):
And it's like, I know this is a huge channel because I can use it on my online marketing, my web marketing, but as a mobile acquisition it's nowhere near as efficient as a lot of these other networks. And so as soon as they were doing that, I was able to basically position and say, "Look it, you want to work with us. Let me into your alpha, because I have five years of experience already buying mobile ads. I know the space. I know it'll work. And if you get us to work, we're a killer case study, because we are a non-game and a lot of money is spent on gaming, but there's these whole other major categories that you're going to need other than gaming examples within that group. So, you're going to be able to use me as a case study and a lot of different scenarios than the gaming players."

Adam Grenier (00:22:59):
And so I was spending a lot less than the gaming players, but because of that understanding that your goal at Facebook is to make ads work for all of travel and for all of leisure and those kinds of things, that's the value of working with me. So, that's another piece of the channel DNA I like people to focus on.

Lenny (00:23:18):
Awesome. That's such a good one, because to your point, if your goals are aligned, they're going to be like, "Yes, let's make this happen." And it always feels like it's this behemoth that doesn't want to talk to any new startups, but if you can make the case of this is going to help you and the way you laid out is so clear, it's such a good idea.

Adam Grenier (00:23:35):
And especially with emerging channels, right? Because their whole thing is that make this work for a long time. It's part of the challenge you see with some new channels flipping to the other side of growing an ads business, will gravitate towards like, "I want to get Disney on here," but Disney is very campaign driven, or they have been traditionally, where it's like you may get one big paycheck from them, but that doesn't... The way that UA driven gaming works is you get that to work, that's a gift that keeps on giving forever, right? Because there's not one of those companies, there's thousands of them and they all do the same thing. So, being able to drive that conversation is really helpful.

Lenny (00:24:18):
Cool.

Adam Grenier (00:24:18):
And then the third main ingredient is just your own company DNA. And so I think risk profile is a big one. Do you actually have comfort in being a first mover, a true first mover? Nobody knows anything, tracking's not going to work, it's not going to be programmatic. You're probably going to show up on content that's offensive. You're probably going to ask for refunds that won't happen. It's going to be really painful to be a true first mover. Do you have that appetite? Do you have the staff to actually be able to put someone on that and it not distract from everything else?

Adam Grenier (00:24:53):
And then the other piece on the company side is just your current channel mix. There's very few companies that I recommend saying, "Yes, go put energy on this brand new channel that you don't know how to scale yet before you've figured out some type of volume on Google and Facebook." Every now and then there may be a perfect fit where it's like, absolutely, you should be the person doing this. But if you're not at least getting something out of the basic channels that everybody else is using, it's probably not the thing you should be putting your first energy into. It should be like, "Great, I've got a good foundation." Like you said, now we're at that stage of trying to add things, tends to be a better stage to do more risky exploration into new channels.

Lenny (00:25:40):
What advice do you have or can you give to founders teams that are trying to test one of these in terms of just how to run these tests? How much time should they spend, would you say? What do they look for? I know that this is a hard question and super dependent on the situation, but any advice there?

Adam Grenier (00:25:55):
So, I think going through those three ingredients should help shape that answer, right? Because if you're like, "Okay, well, the first one is super strong, the channel DNA is maybe really early and I've got a small to mid-size team and maybe only one channel working," then it may be like, "Great. Put half of one person into this, because it's maybe interesting. But don't put any more than that into it." Versus if it's like, "Man, this is a killer fit the channel's a little further along and I have a 20 person team, so I'm going to put three dedicated people to this, because we are in prime position to be the leaders in this new channel and really push it."

Adam Grenier (00:26:36):
So, I think it's figuring those pieces out, because it is a very it depends answer, but rarely ever is it like, "Hey, this should be your entire team's focus for the next three sprints or five sprints." I think that if you've got that half person working on it for a while and there starts to be some magic happening, sure, put a sprint or two against it as a whole team. But generally speaking, I think keeping it minimum at first is my typical recommendation.

Lenny (00:27:06):
I had another guest, Yuri, who I think from former Grammarly, and he made a really good point that it's often better not to try something than to do it badly and then take away the wrong lessons. I guess, in your experience, what's a timeframe you think people should put into this stuff? You said two sprints, maybe a couple weeks. I don't know, what's the range of just maybe don't spend more than X months on something new if it's not clearly working, just based on your experience.

Adam Grenier (00:27:33):
Generally I wouldn't let anything bleed past a quarter. You can probably get some good signal in a month or less, what I would call fishing. It wouldn't be like you're just putting bait in the water to figure out where the fish are, not necessarily getting statistically significant repeatable solutions. The big variables that can change that timing, so if I'm exploring a new video channel, the content I need to create is if I'm going to have to create something that takes three weeks to produce and $20,000 to make, I may want to give it a little more time, because I gave it more of an upfront investment.

Adam Grenier (00:28:16):
Versus if it's like I want to put text ads in podcasts listings or something like that. It's like, great, I can do that by myself at midnight and it's not distracting anybody or anything. And if it doesn't work in three weeks, let's move on. But generally ideally what you're working through, and we'll touch a little bit more on this with the Growth CMO, is that this should all be part of a roadmap. It shouldn't just be randomly chosen and thrown at. This should be part of your sprint process and you should have a backlog of other things that you want to try. And so you're actually weighing that decision of how long based on what other opportunities you're missing out on by investing in that.

Adam Grenier (00:28:57):
But I would say most channels, especially new ones, are going to take more than a couple cycles to kind of suss out. Because there's no rules, there's no playbooks yet on how to do them well. So, give it a little bit of time, but if you're going over a quarter and you don't feel like directionally it's getting better or it's interesting, I would put it back on ice for a while.

Lenny (00:29:18):
Cool. And to your point, you're not going to see any statistically significant answers. Is the thing you look for just like you know it when you see it? Oh wow, qualitatively feels like it's working kind of thing? Is that what you kind of look for?

Adam Grenier (00:29:30):
Yeah, and I think define that going into it. What am I looking for, for this? So, something like Clubhouse I'm probably not going to see clicks. It's more about are we able to start a room and increase the size of that room by 10% every time that we run it? Okay great, that means that we're at least getting better at this and there's more reach available to us. But if we're getting 20 people every time we start a room and then it goes down to 15, then we're either not doing this well, the channel's not doing well, or there's just not enough reach for us to actually expand. Versus TikTok you might be able to say, "Great, I can actually track clicks and conversion, so let's look at it the way we would any other channel."

Lenny (00:30:11):
Got it. So, kind of look for momentum and that you're getting better and that it's moving somewhere. Awesome.

Adam Grenier (00:30:16):
Yeah. Yep.

Lenny (00:30:17):
Cool. So, a question that I'm sure is on many people's minds that they would want to ask is, Adam, what are emerging platforms that are interesting right now that we should experiment with? What do you feel?

Adam Grenier (00:30:28):
So, I mean I mentioned OTT, or basically the key thing with OTT is that it's way more trackable than traditional television, but it has similar value that traditional TV does in terms of the ability to do more long form storytelling type content, and a lot of it's not skippable if you buy it. And so those are reasons to be exploring that right now. It's hard for me to call that emerging channel, because it's been around forever. It's there's more of it and the tools and services around it are way better now than they were four years ago. And so I think the sophistication and ability to scale OTT is much higher now than ever before. Influencers probably the one that I'm most intrigued by, because similar to OTT, the scale and services and the ability to go do it is still there.

Adam Grenier (00:31:19):
It's also got that hyper granularity that when I get into influencer tools, it feels to me like early Facebook when I used to go be able to target Lenny, or 10 people that have exactly the same likes as Lenny. And that type of stuff where it's like you can get so specific and find exactly who you need. It's incredibly tedious and manual and it's a lot of relationship management. So, I'm also keeping an eye on the technology being built around influencer, because I think that's a huge area of opportunity for entrepreneurs right now.

Adam Grenier (00:31:57):
But generally speaking, the scope and opportunity there is huge and it's not going away, but it feels very new and different right now. And it supplements the ability to do some hyper level targeting that you've not been able to do, that Facebook and Google are getting less open about at the same time. I think VR is really interesting in the way that mobile was interesting before iPhone Three, where it was if you've got a VR app, it's a really interesting space, but if you don't, it's not that interesting to me yet. Any that have come up for you that you're like... what are your thoughts on this?

Lenny (00:32:35):
No, these are great. All I think of is TikTok.

Adam Grenier (00:32:38):
I feel like TikTok's crossed a chasm, whereas they actually have a formalized ad platform now, people are finding scale. There's still a ton to do there and influencers is also weird, because it crosses all of these other worlds as well. But I think TikTok is actually hyper interesting and everyone should be doing that. But I think of that less as you should be doing it as should I do it, should I not? And it's more I need to figure out how to do Facebook if I'm at least mildly appropriately should be there.

Adam Grenier (00:33:05):
The podcast ads I think are great. I think that I bought podcast ads 15 years ago, so it doesn't feel like an emerging channel to me. I think there's way more volume now than there's ever been before. One of the guys that was on my team at Uber has a company that's doing programmatic buying and that type of stuff. And so I think there's more opportunities on podcast. I think people want to treat it like Facebook ads or direct response ads, immediate response ads. And actually what I keep seeing as the effective strategy with podcast ads is treating them more like radio where it's more about getting on the right program, making it personal and feel like it should be part of that program, and then repeating over and over and over again.

Adam Grenier (00:33:53):
So, I think podcast is super interesting. I think it's just hard to scale. It's likely not going to get people the same volumes as the Googles and Facebooks of the world.

Lenny (00:34:01):
Cue our mid-roll ad. I'm excited to chat with my friend John Cutler from Podcast sponsor, Amplitude. Hey John.

John Cutler (00:34:08):
Hey, Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny (00:34:10):
John, give us a behind the scenes at Amplitude. When most people think of Amplitude, they think of product analytics, but now you're getting into experimentation and even just launched a CDP. What's the thought process there?

John Cutler (00:34:21):
Well, we've always thought of Amplitude as being about supporting the full product loop. Think collect data, inform bets, ship experiments and learn. That's the heart of growth to us. So, the big aha was seen how many customers were using Amplitude to analyze experiments, use segments for outreach and send data to other destinations. Experiment and CDP came out of listening to and observing our customers.

Lenny (00:34:42):
And supporting growth and learning has always been Amplitude's core focus, right?

John Cutler (00:34:46):
Yeah. So, Amplitude tries to meet customers where they are. We just launched starter templates and have a great scholarship program for startups. There's never been a more important time for growth.

Lenny (00:34:55):
Absolutely agree. Thanks for joining us, John, and head to amplitude.com to get started.

Adam Grenier (00:35:01):
I also come from a very consumer perspective. I'm actually stronger on B2B companies using podcasting, because it has that exact same value I just described, but each one of their customers is substantially more valuable. So, they don't need the scale that a consumer application or product would need.

Lenny (00:35:20):
Yep. That's exactly who I work with usually. One last question on this topic. What percentage of the time do you find that an emerging channel works? Is it like 20% of the time, 10%, 5%? What should people estimate, it's probably not going to work but when it does it's going to be game changing?

Adam Grenier (00:35:34):
Like 5% of the time. There's new things popping up all the time. I think the area that I think of as emerging that I've found more success in is taking things that exist already and make them... so the two slices of it are either it's existed for a long... like podcasting. So, it existed for a long time and now we're finally getting to a spot where it feels scalable. The other is existing channels that introduce something brand new.

Adam Grenier (00:36:04):
So, at the mobile ads I described on Facebook, pre mobile install ads and post. Those first 18 months of mobile install felt like an emerging channel, right? Because they were changing the product every week and tracking didn't work, and there were all these funky problems with it even though Facebook had been around forever. But brand spanking new channels, I don't know, they rarely work or are worth the effort early that you hope that they will be.

Lenny (00:36:35):
Cool. But when they work, it's game changing I imagine. Reminds me Apples coming out with Apple TV, I think it was, and they're just like, "Hey Airbnb, you should make it app for Apple TV. It'll be huge." And there's a team put on it. I don't know. They spent a month building this app and did a bunch of nothing as far as I understand, but it felt good. It felt good to be part of the launch. One question I wanted to come back to, are there tools that you recommend for influencer marketing that you want to plug, or point out?

Adam Grenier (00:37:01):
We were using Grin at Masterclass, we onboarded them. So, there's probably half a dozen companies in that same zone where they're building tools that allow you to do the discovery of influencers, the CRM of those influencers, and also often the measurement and payments and all that kind of stuff. So, it's an all in one type of management platform. That being said though, like I said, it's still super manual. It's nice to be able to go and find this list of 50 influencers that are the exact right influencer for this class launch, or whatever it might be.

Adam Grenier (00:37:34):
But it's still then I have to wait till they all respond to me and there's still a lot of manual back and forth. So, that's probably one of them. I'm trying to think of... There's a few other in that same category that are competitive with Grin that they all seem equally pretty good. I can't even remember the reason we chose Grin over some of the other ones.

Lenny (00:37:53):
It's a good name.

Adam Grenier (00:37:53):
It was all pretty close.

Lenny (00:37:55):
Sweet. Okay. If any other comes to mind, we'll throw it in the show notes. Before we get to the growth CMO discussion, there's kind of this tangential area that I wanted to spend a little time on, which is this idea of as a startup you initially should and often do start with a very narrow audience, your early adopters. I read this post about calling them your super specific who, and eventually you want to cross the chasm and go broader. And you have some interesting insights on how to think about that, and when to do that. Can you talk about that?

Adam Grenier (00:38:26):
Yeah. So, I think the book, Crossing the Chasm, is a great place to start in terms of thinking about the broader topic of that. What I see missed a lot of the time that I like to spend time with people on is to really understand that those early adopters are often just drastically different than the broad audience. And spending time to actually figure that out and map out what you need to see with those early adopters to have confidence that the product is actually going to have product market fit beyond them.

Adam Grenier (00:39:07):
So, I don't have anything hyper specific to add to that necessarily, or happy to dig in deeper to it, but it's probably the biggest challenge that I've seen with a lot of companies that I've worked with. And then as I do more investing and things like that, it's probably the biggest flag that I see with a lot of companies that claim to have product market fit, which is your TAM and your product market fit are not using the same definition. And that problem I think is often just a red flag for a lot of companies that I meet.

Lenny (00:39:40):
Got it. So, essentially you often underestimate how challenging it'll be to grow from your initial early adopter crowd. Is there an example of that happening where a company just got screwed because they didn't think about that enough? Or is there something someone can do early on? Is it test a little bit more broadly early? What do you recommend there?

Adam Grenier (00:39:59):
I mean Clubhouse might be a good example in the sense that they leaned into the broader audience maybe quicker than they should have. Their product market fit seemed to fit the moment in time and could they have built some experiments, or tools, or features that maybe stress tested will this work in an ongoing fashion? If they were on such tear, that's a pretty hard decision to make, I'm sure.

Lenny (00:40:29):
So hard, it's easy in hindsight.

Adam Grenier (00:40:33):
I think that's another piece of it is that the audience changes aren't always just literal people. Even right now, one of the biggest pieces of advice I'm giving to people that are like, "How should we adjust our marketing with the economic changes and things like that?" I was like, "Start by assuming you no longer have product market fit, because you had product market fit in a different market. It's a different market now, so you have to start over."

Adam Grenier (00:40:57):
And hopefully you do, or it's pretty close to it and you just have to adjust a couple things and you can be right back on track. But if you just assume you need to launch a new channel to fix this problem, you're going to be wrong, because your entire customer base changed, not just the next 10% of customers that you're looking for.

Lenny (00:41:14):
It's just a reminder of how freaking hard startups are. Man, we have product market fit. Okay, we're done. Let's move on.

Adam Grenier (00:41:21):
Not anymore.

Lenny (00:41:21):
Not anymore. Oh man. Okay, sweet. So, onto this next topic around the Growth CMO. So, you're this really interesting combination of marketing brain and also very analytical growth person, and I think you refer to this as Growth CMO, which I don't actually hear the term much. So, I'm curious, what is a Growth CMO? How do you define it? And why is it important?

Adam Grenier (00:41:43):
Yeah, so it's something I've just spent a lot of the last few years thinking about, specifically because now I've been at a handful of companies where we've brought in CMOs that in all ways are absolute world class CMOs, and they don't last, they don't fit and they don't succeed. And so I've spent a lot of time and figuring, well, why not? Some of it coming because of spending time with those people being like, "Why are you doing it this way? That's not how a company at our stage operates."

Adam Grenier (00:42:18):
Trying to do it the way that a traditional CMO would've done marketing for a company, et cetera. One of the key examples I like to use is brand, in that everybody when they think about brand they think of it as an action, not as a consistent ongoing investment, or they think about it as campaigns and things like that. And from planning to execution to learnings, a traditional CMO will drive learnings and identify learnings. And in my mind, I think a Growth CMO is looking at each brand investment as how do you then immediately follow that up with the next one? How do you shift to this fast product iteration mindset with even things like brand?

Adam Grenier (00:42:58):
It's very possible, but it's so counter to a lot of traditional marketing DNA. That, to me, means that we have a lot of mismatch marketing leadership, and that quickly eliminates trust with the marketing organization. It means that we rename everything marketing to product led growth, or growth, or referral programs. To me, it actually dilutes the value of marketing should be playing in the company. And it doesn't mean that the traditional marketing CMO isn't a good fit for some companies.

Adam Grenier (00:43:37):
I think the direct to consumer products are still very well suited to have a more traditional CMO. But I think product driven companies, product led companies, if you are CMO and your product leader aren't married at the hip, you're just missing out on just tons of opportunity, and the likelihood of things actually working very well consistently and compounding on each other.

Lenny (00:44:05):
So, what are the attributes of this person of what you call a Growth CMO? Sounds like partly it's being much more performance driven. Sounds like a big part of it is understanding product and not creating these silos. We're going to market the thing, you guys go build this thing. But also as a person, that's a great CMO. What else do you look for?

Adam Grenier (00:44:22):
So, I would say so data driven generally. To me performance is a very loaded word in our world, because people think, especially in marketing, think that means not brand. But they're very data driven. And so when we take things like retention and even brand and the consideration funnel and, yes, you can't measure those exactly like you can measure landing page clicks and sales, but you absolutely can measure them. And making that part of the DNA of everything that's happening, data being part of that, I think is pretty quintessential of being a growth driven CMO.

Adam Grenier (00:45:00):
The second, I think, is the iteration process is not thinking about things and, "Hey, we need to plan for the next 24 months," but you can still do that and you can still have a vision and everything. But having that more of a agile type approach to everything. And again, this could be the storytelling that your sales people are doing, to what are your landing pages look like, to what is the design of your logo, to the brand itself. All of those things, like being more open to everything being possibly iterated on, on a regular basis using data to validate that and challenge what has worked for you.

Adam Grenier (00:45:38):
We live in such a real time world now, especially with product driven companies. The things change so quickly. If you as a marketing leader aren't being iterative and thoughtful about things with it, you'll get eaten alive. And then I think experimentation is just a huge piece of it. And something that I see a lot of more traditional marketing leaders, the idea of experimentation is try a new channel. It's not like how do we experiment with our brand? How do we experiment with the funnel? The whole picture, not just the top of the funnel or the external elements of it.

Adam Grenier (00:46:17):
One of the things that I haven't quite figured out the right language to put against this, but the traditional model of marketing is the four P's, product, placement, promotion, pricing. And in my mind, the world that we live in now, product is no longer a part of marketing, but it's actually they're married at the hip. They're one and the same, and most companies aren't operating that way. They're still operating as if they're two wildly different things. Even if they say they're working together, it's still, there's not. And to me it's just like, no, no, the product, it is the company now.

Adam Grenier (00:46:59):
And the marketing is integrated with literally every single piece of it. A lot of traditional marketing got established in the 1920s and the 1950s around products that took years to develop or try, or a product team was a science group trying new flavors of cereal. And so the marketing team owned the box, where it went on the shelf and what the price was and all of those kinds of things was marketing, because product was such a wildly different part of the organization. And I think still there's just a lot of fundamental things that marketers think about that are stuck in that world, because most haven't had to grow through the true growth of a business that's just being established today.

Lenny (00:47:53):
And the assumption is every software company should be hiring a CMO that is of this sort, of a Growth CMO, right?

Adam Grenier (00:48:01):
Yeah. And I would say that my sense is that there's very few marketing leaders that can't be a Growth CMO. So, I don't think you have to have come up as a performance driven experimentation. It's more about adapting and growing. And again, the fundamentals are all the same. One of my pet projects that I haven't done anything with yet, is that every time something new comes out in the growth world, I go back in history as far as I can to try to find the earliest example of that. Just to be able to say, "Look, this isn't new, but we can learn from the way that Coca-Cola invented the coupon."

Adam Grenier (00:48:37):
The first known coupon was Coca-Cola giving away Coke for free, but it was actually a marketplace, because what they would do is they would go to a town and they would go to the soda fountain and they would give a free Coke syrup to that side of the market and they would give coupons to the other side of the market to spark it, to get it going. And then it's like, well, now all the customers want Coke, now you need to supply it, you'll pay for it. And learning that and understanding that is really cool. And it's just interesting to me, because I'm a huge nerd.

Adam Grenier (00:49:09):
But that to me is all of the things that great marketing leaders have learned are right, it's the operating aspect of those insights and those skills and understanding your customer and their psychology. All of those things have stayed the same. It's the operating of it in the way a growth organization, like a product driven growth organization operates, is very fundamentally different than the way a traditional marketing run organization had run.

Lenny (00:49:37):
I was going to ask you what a marketing leader can do to evolve into this where you think things are going, and your point about you're capable of it, you can iterate and adapt is really great and empowering. Is there anything specific they can do to learn how to do this better, other than is it like mentorship? Is there classes, courses? Just do the job, figure it out? Do you have anything you can suggest there to folks listening and they're like, "Oh, shit. I'm in trouble?"

Adam Grenier (00:50:02):
Honestly, I think learn product development. Go learn agile product development. And there's actually a book called Hacking Marketing, I think. I'll confirm. But it's essentially how to run a marketing team on Agile. That to me is just, again, any great marketing leader should be able to go and consume how to do product development, how to run a product like sprints and those types of things. And their mind, if they're great marketing CMO or a CMO, will be like, "Oh my gosh, I could do this with this big event that we want to host. I could do this with everything."

Adam Grenier (00:50:43):
There's nothing off the table when you actually learn those fundamentals. But as well as I know smart people can learn that stuff. There's lots of resources out there. Reforge has some classes on it, there's a bunch of new product led growth classes out in the wild, like Maven I think has a couple. And there's a variety of those types of things that just going and doing it, you don't have to go and operate it yourself. You don't have to go become a product manager. But understanding those skills and those systems will, one, I think make you think differently about how to run your marketing team and, two, make you exponentially better at working with your product organization.

Lenny (00:51:21):
Awesome. I'm actually hearing from folks listening to this podcast not live right now, but broadly, that this is a good way to learn how product works and how product leaders think. So, that's interesting. So, if you're listening to this, good job. You also mentioned that a lot of marketing leaders don't work out at a company, they join, they leave, things go wrong. As a hiring founder or leader, what do you look for to tell you this person's probably not what we need and not what you'd call a Growth CMO? What are flags that are like they're probably not going to adapt and evolve to the way we want to operate?

Adam Grenier (00:51:53):
So, I think first and foremost, it obviously depends on the stage. Anything let's say C or below, comfortable with chaos and willingness to go do something they have not done for probably 15 years are two huge signals for me, because every company I've been part of at every scale now, which is all of them basically, that's the thing that a lot of people coming from more traditional marketing environments into startup worlds, it's a pace and just the unpredictability and change and those kinds of things are just at such a higher rate than they've seen for a long time that it can be really jarring for people.

Adam Grenier (00:52:49):
And I think it's totally reasonable. It's crazy, right? If anybody that's had the exposure on both sides. And then the willingness to go do the work. People are churning constantly and the challenges are different every week and those types of things. And so it's like every now and then you've got to go write an email or you've got to go open up Facebook and get into the weeds with it with your team, into the data of it and that type of stuff. And that's stuff that I don't want to do, personally, me. I'm past the point where I should be in Facebook.

Adam Grenier (00:53:17):
But man, when I need to, I'm willing to, and I'll go get in the weeds with it and I'll use my time to just be like, "Look, we have to figure this out now." And I'm going to go do the things that I thought I was done with in my career. So, those are pretty big ones. I think then generally speaking, one of the exercises I like to take founders through when they're hiring a marketing leader is every marketer is going to have a T-shaped career.

Adam Grenier (00:53:41):
Everybody came from something they probably became awesome at and then over time just expanded their purview. So, for me it was mobile. I got into mobile. My first client ever was on Sun Microsystems early 2000s, getting Java developers to make apps for flip phones. So, I just knew digital mobile world really, really well before a lot of people did. But then eventually I'm like, "Great, now I'm running an entire digital marketing team. Now I'm running an entire marketing team. Now I'm getting into growth. Now I want to learn product," and I've expanded. And so typically it's going through that exercise of find out their T, find out their strength, and then spend time figuring out how they make up for those other things.

Adam Grenier (00:54:24):
So, for me, at Lambda school I ran our PR team for a while. I am not a PR person, but I make it a goal in my life to get to the valley of despair of the Dunning-Kruger effect, to be like, "Great, I just need to know how bad I am at PR," because if I still think I'm good at it, that's not a good place for me to be. But once I know how bad it is, I now know I need to go hire the right person to come in and I'm going to listen to them. I'm not going to assume that I'm smarter than them, and those types of things. And so I think the same thing with product questions and data questions and experimentation questions for this concept of a Growth CMO is like, well, somebody's coming from a world where they've not had to work really closely with the product team, spend time with them to figure out how they plan on adapting to that.

Adam Grenier (00:55:12):
My guess is most won't have thought of that. The good ones will be able to figure it out together with you in that interview, or afterwards, or whatever it might be.

Lenny (00:55:22):
Awesome. Maybe one day we'll do a follow-up chat just to dive into hiring a marketing person. I know that's a whole deep topic.

Adam Grenier (00:55:31):
Lots of thoughts.

Lenny (00:55:31):
Okay. Oh man. Okay. We've got to book that. But, okay. So, you mentioned the valley of despair, and that's a good segue to our next topic. So, I found this old tweet of yours where you talk about burnout and depression, and you kind of make this point that a lot of times you feel like it's burnout and it's actually depression. And just broadly mental health is just this topic that's not really spoken a lot about in tech and in business. And so I'd love to just spend a little time on this. I know you're a big proponent of talking about these sorts of things, so I'm curious, I know you've been through both these things and I'm curious just to hear your journey, what that's been like, and what you've learned about how to get through it?

Adam Grenier (00:56:08):
So, the two biggest inputs for me in terms of really taking the time to understand my mental health, one is my wife, who's been a very strong proponent of mental health resources for everybody since I met her. And so just being able to learn from her and get exposure to, well, why is this important? What are the values of it? And seeing it pretty regularly of family members, or coworkers. Or it's like, oh man, I bet there's something deeper here that maybe is important for them to figure out.

Lenny (00:56:46):
Is that just something she's good at, or is she trained in this stuff?

Adam Grenier (00:56:49):
No, she's good at it and she's in therapy and stuff like that. She's one of the most empathetic, passionate people I've ever met in my life. And so she just feels like poor people so much that I think it's something really important to her. And then at Uber, I got to a spot where I was incredibly exhausted and tired and just down, not excited about work and things like that, and so I started going to therapy and with this assumption that I was just working too hard.

Adam Grenier (00:57:20):
That was kind of my like, "Man, I need to go to therapy to figure out the tools that I need to deal with me working too hard." And I just uncovered so many interesting things that I wouldn't have expected. So, one was that I'm the youngest child in my family and I did something pretty different than a lot of my relatives and things like that. So, recognition is something I long for, and it turns out I get that at work and I just hadn't gotten that in other parts of my life. And so this thing that I'm like, "This is my problem," was actually a solution to my real problem.

Adam Grenier (00:57:58):
And knowing that just helped me totally just change my perspective of how hard I work. I was getting judgemental about myself around, "Man, I'm working too hard. I shouldn't be doing this, but I have to." And then I got in the spot where I'm like, "Oh, I'm working hard because I love it, because I like it, I'm having an impact and I'm working with people I like and people respect the work that I do." And that helped me identify that I can work just as hard, but I can work smarter. I can work more on the things I have impact on.

Adam Grenier (00:58:30):
I can work more with people that actually respected the type of work that I'm doing. And that actually just started to relax me and get me to the spot of, "Oh, okay," I still some burnout in there, and that's part of the innovation. Part of my title was that I got to a spot where I'm like, I was traveling constantly, I had teams all over the world and the structure of Uber was working where every city had a GM and I was the person they called when their spend was too high. And so 500 GMs-

Lenny (00:59:05):
Uber GMs especially.

Adam Grenier (00:59:06):
Yeah, exactly. And so I was working in a world where I was dealing with a lot of politics. I love mentoring people, and I had this massive team of 150 people that I barely know any of them. And so I'm not mentoring people either anymore. And I just felt like I'm working so hard on things that I actually don't enjoy. And so I'm like, I'm going to go work on flying cars, which is a whole other podcast too. So, that was my, okay, there was burnout in there.

Adam Grenier (00:59:33):
I know that was a fact, but some of those feelings or things that I felt my entire life that I uncovered that I thought was just burnt out, I was like, "Oh, actually at this point in my life, this point in my life and this point in my life, I felt this way too. And at those points I wasn't burnt out. And so I actually have deeper work to do here and deeper understanding of myself so that I can actually maximize my life and enjoy it." And because I'm going to keep working to some degree this hard. And I want to just make the most of that.

Lenny (01:00:03):
I don't know if you mentioned this, but I imagine parts of those points were depression, not burnout. What have you found to be that line of just like, "Oh wow, this is a lot more serious than I'm just working way too hard?"

Adam Grenier (01:00:14):
For me, it's hard to describe, but I personally now can pretty cleanly tell the difference between exhaustion and depression. And it tends to tie to my broader motivations, not just my motivation to work. So, when I'm exhausted, I'll still show up to work, I'll still execute, I'll still do those types of things, but I'm going to go and if I can take an improv class, it's going to be a blast. I'm going to enjoy it and I'm going to love it. If I'm depressed, I won't go to that improv class. I'll just cancel it. I won't go to it. Or if I go to it, I'll go home immediately. One of the things I love about actual improv classes, is the community. Is, "Hey, let's all go grab a drink now." And this is a totally different group of people. It's not my family, it's not my work people, it's just me.

Adam Grenier (01:01:17):
And I wouldn't do that. And so it's kind of noticing where else is this impacting and to what degree and why, can help me understand what's going on in my life. Because more often than not, I can then take those feelings and it'll be like, "Oh, I've felt this way for three weeks now. I should think about this and dissect it a little bit." And so again, I'll spend time with my therapist. One of the tools that my therapist has given me is to open up with my friends and have these conversations with my friends. And so now I went from five, six years ago really just having my therapist or my wife to talk about this kind of stuff to, I don't know, I have five or six different friends that we're massively transparent with each other about this stuff, because the second I shared any of this with them, they shared it with me.

Adam Grenier (01:02:06):
And now we've become safe places to have those conversations where I can be like, "Hey, there's this thing going on." My dad has ALS and so he's been really sick and I've got three kids and I've got jobs and work and money and the market crash. And there's so many different things. It's like, okay, let me actually figure out which one of these things is causing this energy right now. And having many years of therapy now and those resources can help me get to that solution to get to that answer so that I can figure out, okay, what do I need to do right now? Do I need to actually take time for myself and dig deeper into these personal things? Do I actually need to change something with the shape of my career? Those types of things.

Lenny (01:02:47):
Awesome. And it sounds like the things that have been most helpful, and I'm curious what else you'd recommend to folks that are maybe feeling some of this. So, it sounds like therapy is really powerful, your partner and being open to your partner, finding a group of friends where you could be transparent about these sorts of things. Is there anything else you suggest folks look into?

Adam Grenier (01:03:04):
Yeah. So, I think meditation's a good one. The startup people love to talk about meditation, and so you can find lots of ways to do that. It's kind of evolved for me. So, it's in that tweet thread and I can't remember it now. There was a meditation thing that was the first, it almost felt like Noom for me for meditation where it wasn't just-

Lenny (01:03:24):
Waking Up, Sam Harris's-

Adam Grenier (01:03:25):
Yeah, Waking Up where it's like I'm actually learning about meditation, not just learning how to meditate. And that's how my brain likes to do things. I'm a lifetime learner, I love digging into things. I learned breathing techniques and things like that, but going through that program of Waking Up was the first time I actually really appreciated when and how and where to do it. I'm still not a everyday meditate person.

Adam Grenier (01:03:50):
I now use, I'm an investor, so I'm biased, but Aura, A-U-R-A, which is a marketplace app. It's some of the other meditation apps, but it's a marketplace, so it's actually coaches and stuff adding content. So, I use that now as needed, which I really enjoy. The exercise and diet and those types of things definitely tie to it. It's like eating is a pretty clean signal for me, or snacking is a really clean signal, at least for me of like, okay, I'm snacking more than I should be, and eating healthy can both help me identify that I'm in those spots, but also just make me feel better.

Adam Grenier (01:04:29):
One thing I would say is that the therapist that I found, I found through a service that we had at Uber, and I think I was surprised how much stuff is covered by companies in terms of the ability to find a therapist, pay for a therapist or other tools. And so that's one thing I would suggest, go look through your benefits. Your healthcare provider offers a lot of that stuff too. So, those are a handful of. Listen to Lenny's podcast?

Lenny (01:04:58):
I hope that to be true. I don't know if that's anywhere near as powerful as these other things. One thing I'll mention is on the meditation front, there's this amazing book that kind of does exactly what you also describe where it teaches you why this works. It's called, it's kind of like a bad title, it's called Why Buddhism is True. And it's not trying to convince you to be a Buddhist, but it has a lot of incredible insights on why meditation is so powerful and how to think about it. So, I'll put that in the show notes too.

Adam Grenier (01:05:24):
Awesome.

Lenny (01:05:24):
Yeah.

Adam Grenier (01:05:24):
I'm going to check that out.

Lenny (01:05:25):
I wanted to come back to the burnout piece. I imagine some folks are listening to this and they're like, "Am I burnt out? I don't know." What are signs that you're burnt out versus just working a lot and tired?

Adam Grenier (01:05:37):
The one that I see the most is adaptability goes down really fast. And this is more me noticing I've managed a lot of people and coached a lot of people, so when I see that from people that I'm working with, I usually immediately bring up, I'm like, "Look, your openness to change in the business, or trying new things, or going back and trying things that maybe we tried before and didn't work has shifted from, 'Oh, here are the flags that we should be aware of, but let's give it a shot' to 'Why are we wasting our time? Let's not do this.'"

Adam Grenier (01:06:12):
This energy around, let's just do the thing we're supposed to do. And I think that's maybe specifically applicable to our environment, to high growth and marketing and product where it's just, that's just a key ingredient to doing this job well, is adaptability and flexibility and exploration. And if you're losing that, it's probably not because you've gotten bad at it, right? It's probably because you're just over it, right? Where you're like, "I just don't want to deal with the BS around this. I want to go do the thing that makes my job easier."

Adam Grenier (01:06:46):
Which again, most of the people that have chosen this career path want their jobs to be harder, because it's more fun, it's more interesting, it's more rewarding. And so when you're looking for ways to minimize the challenge or the opportunity, I think that's a pretty good signal that they may be more burnt out than just exhaustion. Because if anything, I see the opposite for people that are exhausted, where they get re-motivated by new stuff, by opportunities to go do something different and that kind of stuff.

Lenny (01:07:15):
Wow. Really good insight. Second to last question, I know you have to run, where are you on this journey today and then just what's next for Adam Grenier?

Adam Grenier (01:07:24):
Yeah, thank you. Good question. I'm constantly optimizing this matrix of what am I good at versus what do I love doing? And so what I've found is that I really love entrepreneurs and working really closely with entrepreneurs and helping them figure out all of these funky things that I've been able to see over the last 20 years and maneuver. And I've worked at a lot of places and so I'm really good at context changing and helping connect the dots for people.

Adam Grenier (01:07:52):
And so a couple ways I've found to be able to do that is advising companies, so working with founders and growth leaders and things like that and investing. And so I'm actually right now, I've been investing now for six, seven years. I've recently joined Andreessen's Scout fund, so I'm doing a bit more volume now. But I would say if I had to make a bet right now, I think a full-time or closer to full-time investing world is what I'd like to lean more towards. But I'm very much a let's just open up opportunities, and once the right one is in front of me, I'm going to tackle it.

Adam Grenier (01:08:23):
And so who knows, I may go back full time somewhere or whatnot. But right now the advising, investing, coaching kind of hybrid is the term, I think it was Behzod at Reforge used, was me as a service is my current world. But I'd be shocked if I eventually don't gravitate towards some kind of foundation, because I thrive when I've got a little bit of an anchor.

Lenny (01:08:46):
Amazing. A mass, me as a service.

Adam Grenier (01:08:49):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:08:49):
Okay. For folks that may want to reach out to you about taking your money in their startup, or asking whatever questions, maybe advising questions, where can folks reach you and learn more?

Adam Grenier (01:09:00):
Just Twitter, AKGrenier and LinkedIn as well, it's AKGrier. So, look me up, connect. I'm always open to connecting and chatting with people and I just love digging into problems. So, happy to abide.

Lenny (01:09:13):
Amazing. Adam, this was such an action packed chat, so many levels and layers. I can't wait for folks to listen to this. Thank you so much for joining me and being here.

Adam Grenier (01:09:21):
Yeah, thanks for having me.

Lenny (01:09:22):
My pleasure. Thanks man.

Adam Grenier (01:09:24):
Good stuff. Take care.

Lenny (01:09:26):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Alex Hardiman (00:00:00):
One thing that's really interesting is that our impact and our business goals are in service of our mission, which is to seek the truth and help people understand the world, not the other way around. What it means is that the way that we think about impact is growing a giant subscription business. That business exists to strengthen an informed democracy at a time when people are struggling to understand basic facts and struggling to understand each other. That means that impact for us is growing subscribers, but it's also when a deeply reported story triggers an important policy change or a new law.

Alex Hardiman (00:00:40):
When you're a product manager, you're involved again in driving specific metrics like engagement or subscribers, but you're also trying to help stories find their real audience in ways that trigger just this whole different side of mission and purpose driven impact. I didn't feel that when I was at a place like Facebook.

Lenny (00:01:00):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today, my guest is Alex Hardiman. Alex is Chief Product Officer at the New York Times where she leads teams that build the company's news, cooking, games, audio, and advertising products. Prior to this role, she was Chief Product Officer at The Atlantic, and before that, she spent two years at Facebook where she led their news product amongst other things. As you'll hear in our conversation, Alex has been at the center of the storm so many times, including at Facebook right after the 2016 election.

Lenny (00:01:33):
Then, at the New York Times right as COVID hit. She hears so many stories and insights about how the New York Times builds product, what it's like for product teams to work with journalists, what's good and bad about working at a company like the New York Times versus FAANG tech type company, and also how they went about acquiring and integrating world. I had such a blast doing this interview and I hope that you enjoy it as much as I did. With that, I bring you Alex Hardiman. Today's episode is brought to you by Miro. Creating a product, especially one that your users can't live without is damn hard, but it's made easier by working closely with your colleagues to capture ideas, get feedback, and being able to iterate quickly.

Lenny (00:02:19):
That's where Miro comes in. Miro is an online visual whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours. I actually use Miro to come up with a plan for this very ad. With Miro, you can build out your product strategy by brainstorming with sticky notes, comments, slide reactions, voting tools, even a timer to keep your team on track. You can also bring your whole distributed team together around wire frames where anyone can draw their own ideas with pen tool or put their own images or mockups right into the Miro board. With one of Miro's ready made templates, you can go from discovery and research, to product roadmaps, to customer journey flows, to final mocks.

Lenny (00:02:57):
Want to see how I use Miro? Head on over to my Miro board at miro.com/lenny to see my most popular podcast episodes, my favorite Miro templates. You can also leave feedback on this podcast episode and more. That's M-I-R-O.com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Athletic Greens. I've been hearing about AG1 on basically every podcast that I listened to, like Tim Ferriss and Lex Fridman. I finally gave it a shot earlier this year and it has quickly become a core part of my morning routine, especially on days that I need to go deep on writing or record a podcast like this. Here's three things that I love about AG1. One, with a small scoop that dissolves in water, you are absorbing 75 vitamins, minerals, probiotics, and adaptogens.

Lenny (00:03:48):
I like to think of it as a little safety net for my nutrition in case I've missed something in my diet. Two, they treat AG1 like a software product. Apparently, they're on their 52nd iteration and they're constantly evolving it based on the latest science, research studies, and internal testing that they do. Three, it's just one easy thing that I can do every single day to take care of myself. Right now, it's time to reclaim your health and arm your immune system with convenient daily nutrition. It's just one scoop and a cup of water every day, and that's it. There's no need for a million different pills and supplements to look out for your health.

Lenny (00:04:25):
To make it easy, Athletic Greens is going to give you a free one-year supply of immune supporting Vitamin D and five free travel packs with your first purchase. All you have to do is visit athleticgreens.com/lenny. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/lenny. Take ownership over your health and pick up the ultimate daily nutritional insurance. Alex, thank you for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Alex Hardiman (00:04:52):
Thanks so much, Lenny. It's really awesome to be here with you.

Lenny (00:04:55):
What's interesting is I think you may be the first product leader on this podcast who doesn't work at a big tech FAANG startup, and so I'm really excited to just dig into see what it's like to build product at a company like the New York Times.

Alex Hardiman (00:05:08):
Thank you. No, no, that sounds awesome. Let's dive right in.

Lenny (00:05:12):
Okay, before we dive in, I'd love to get a little bit of background on just your career. I'm curious, what was your career path to becoming the chief product officer at the New York Times?

Alex Hardiman (00:05:23):
Thanks for asking. I've definitely spent most of my career right at the intersection of journalism and tech. I think in hindsight, if you were to ask my family, they probably wouldn't be that surprised, even though for me I was just rolling with it and following what felt like a really interesting set of problems to solve. But when I just look at my family, there is a ton of journalism in our DNA. My grandfather was a news anchor on the West Coast and I really revered him. My great-grandmother, she was pretty amazing. She actually started one of the first TV stations in the Midwest back in the '50s when it was still pioneering territory.

Alex Hardiman (00:06:01):
For me, one of my first, the dream for me was to try to find a way to build things in the new space. That's how I first ended up at The New York Times. I've had two stints at The New York Times. My first stint was for a decade, from 2000 to 2016, and it was during a really interesting time of pretty big transformation. There's so much to talk about within that decade, but I would say there are two really big things that happened in that moment. The first was really trying to work with the company to shift from being a print first product into a mobile first product. If you go back to 2006 and you think about it, the Times had no mobile presence whatsoever.

Alex Hardiman (00:06:40):
Even the iPhone 2G and the App Store didn't come out I think until like 2008. We just really started investing in small mobile use cases, first on the margins and then more and more aggressively until we were just leading with mobile in everything that we did. New journalism formats, new product features, new revenue opportunities, that type of thing. Then, the second big thing that marked my journey at The New York Times was the shift to a direct to consumer subscription model. This was back in 2011, and there was just a lot of skepticism, including from people at The New York Times, about whether or not people would pay for quality journalism.

Alex Hardiman (00:07:17):
We brought in consultants and they said, "Maybe over the course of history it'll get to one million subscribers, if you're lucky." It felt like a really big nervous [inaudible 00:07:27] at the time. But thank goodness it helped make a market for paid journalism, that has really helped a lot of news organizations find new ways to support quality coverage. But after a decade I did what I think a lot of people did, was you look around and you say, "I love what I do, but I would love to go learn how to do product in the context of a product led digital first company." That's when I went to Facebook and I left in 2016.

Alex Hardiman (00:07:52):
The timing is actually pretty important in terms of my experience at Facebook, because when I first joined Facebook, I totally left the media space. I was focused on building out a team that was really trying to help micro sellers in markets like India and other parts of APAC, who were coming online for the first time in really low bandwidth areas, and just wanted to sell their goods through social commerce. Really looking at what WhatsApp and Line and other regional competitors were doing. We were focused on business messaging and the interoperability of the Facebook apps from more of a small business perspective. It was really awesome work.

Alex Hardiman (00:08:28):
Then, the 2016 presidential election happened. I had only been there for a couple of months and as has been discussed very widely and reported widely, it was a wild time where there was just so much reckoning around misinformation, disinformation, election integrity, platform responsibility. I went over very quickly to help out on the news front where I led the product and engineering teams and it was really hard, really interesting work. I did that for a couple of years, decided-

Lenny (00:08:58):
Before we move on.

Alex Hardiman (00:09:00):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:09:00):
I'm curious. Okay. Wait, you were leading the news product at Facebook during the election?

Alex Hardiman (00:09:03):
Right after the election.

Lenny (00:09:05):
Right after the election, after everyone was coming after Facebook trying to tear it down?

Alex Hardiman (00:09:09):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:09:09):
Wow. What year was that?

Alex Hardiman (00:09:13):
I joined in early 2017 on that effort. The election was November, 2016.

Lenny (00:09:19):
Oh, my God. Before you move on, just what was that like? I don't know how one can describe that experience, but what do you think about when you think back to that time?

Alex Hardiman (00:09:28):
I think about wartime product management, right? You're coming in, and I think there was ... What I appreciated about that time inside of Facebook was that there was just this incredible humility that was needed to really understand and first diagnose what was actually happening on the platform, and the approach to content on Facebook historically it was very binary. You basically had content from friends and family and then you had public contents. Public content could come from anywhere. It could come from a reputable news organization or it could come from my younger brother posting something and declaring it to be true.

Alex Hardiman (00:10:06):
What we really tried to do very quickly was try to unpack the categories of public content to say that there actually is something that is factually accurate information, and that requires a certain craft from the journalistic trade. There are ways to really look at what is trusted information, how you make that a little bit more essential and visible to people on the platform, while then reducing things that are at best dubious or at worse truly misleading propaganda. It was really fascinating and really hard just because the platform hadn't been built to think about classification of coverage in that way.

Alex Hardiman (00:10:44):
Let alone to have the right goals and responsibilities and incentives. There was just a ton of work to figure out how to make the platform far safer and far more informative after, I would say, a pretty intense election cycle.

Lenny (00:10:58):
Yeah. I was going to ask you about this later, but I feel like you're drawn towards just crazy, wild and crazy center of the storm roles. I guess that one you didn't expect necessarily to become that. I imagine The New York Times has a lot of that, but maybe a quick question there. What have you learned about just living in a world of just constant chaos and stress and urgency, endless urgency?

Alex Hardiman (00:11:21):
I would say, if you did ask my family and my husband, he would say that I'm always attracted to the more chaotic problems. I just actually think that that's where product people thrive. The idea of being able to take all of these crazy inputs, trying to create a very structured model to figure out, "Okay, what is true? Where do we have conviction? Where do we have questions? What are the most important problems to solve? How do you prioritize? How do you get a team rallied around a shared context in one single goal? These are actually the conditions where product manager, I think, thrive.

Alex Hardiman (00:11:55):
For me, just having been in the journalism space for about two decades now, it's just been or the tech space around news, it's just been a constant set of upheaval and transformation. Some things within our control, some things entirely outside of our control, and so I love it. For me, there's nothing else I'd rather be doing than trying to solve these problems in the world at scale. But it does take a certain amount of just grit and resilience, and the ability to really focus on the most important problems in a given moment. Also, the ability to let other things slide when you have to.

Alex Hardiman (00:12:32):
But again, I feel like these are core product skills that we look for in terms of leadership and grit, and the ability to drive through really, really tough problems that there's no playbook for, nobody has ever really done before.

Lenny (00:12:43):
Yeah. You said PMs thrive in this. I think some do. Some are like, "No, leave me out of that."

Alex Hardiman (00:12:48):
I guess that's true.

Lenny (00:12:50):
There's a metaphor I like to use when I give PM's advice on where to work within a company, which is there's like the Eye of Sauron, which is the number one most important thing to the CEO at that time. My advice is often don't avoid that thing, usually, but work maybe to the side of that because you don't want to work on something that doesn't matter, that's like over in the shire land. You want to be something that matters but not maybe the most important thing. I feel like you're the opposite. You're like, "Where's the Eye of Sauron focused? I'm going to go there and build stuff." That's pretty awesome.

Alex Hardiman (00:13:20):
Awesome, sometimes, I'm sure there are moments too where it would be nice to chill, but I am drawn to those types of problems for sure. This feels like therapy, Lenny. I'm into it.

Lenny (00:13:31):
Tell me about your mother.

Alex Hardiman (00:13:34):
She's wonderful.

Lenny (00:13:37):
Okay, great. That's the end of that one. I'll let you finish your career overview and then-

Alex Hardiman (00:13:42):
I feel like we're almost at present, which is I found that there was so much incredible experience that I was able to soak up and lean at a place like Facebook. For me, I really wanted to figure out how to apply that back into organizations that just had more of a classic journalistic mission and purpose, so I went to the Atlantic for a year. They had just been purchased by the Emerson Collective, so it was a really fun moment of just investment and expansion and ambition. We launched their consumer business. Then, I came back to The New York Times in late 2019, right before the pandemic, and I've been there ever since.

Lenny (00:14:19):
Oh my, just your timing is impeccable every time.

Alex Hardiman (00:14:22):
It really is.

Lenny (00:14:24):
I was doing some research on you before this chat and when you came back to The New York Times, there's all these stories about how big of a deal it was. Returns to The New York Times. That must have been something coming back, because you're there for 10 years initially, and then you came back. What was that experience like just coming back to something like that after being away?

Alex Hardiman (00:14:43):
I felt really lucky. When I left The New York Times back in 2016, it was on really, really good terms. It almost felt as like, I'm going on an externship and I really hope that one day I'll be able to come back and just do my job better. Because I do think there's real value in being able to do product in a bunch of different contexts. You're just so much better at pattern recognition, learning how to solve a diversity of problems, learning to work through things. I had a lot of great support when I left, which was really important. I don't think everyone necessarily has the privilege of that support when they exit a company. When I came back, it was just a real moment of excitement. My interview process, I joked with my boss at the time. But it did actually feel more like therapy.

Alex Hardiman (00:15:30):
When you've worked with people for a decade before and you go in, the conversation isn't the normal list of interview questions. It's like, "Okay, here's what type of leader you were a couple of years ago. Here are the conditions on the ground now, how do you feel about X? How do you feel about Y? Are you still passionate about solving this? What else have you learned that's going to make you better?" It was wonderful. It was one of the best interview processes because you're talking to a bunch of people who knew what you were like when you were leading as a person at a different point in your career and they're pushing you to be better. I felt like I got the best chance of a lifetime to come back and try to do my job better than I had been able to do it before, and that's pretty cool.

Lenny (00:16:12):
You've been there three years at this point?

Alex Hardiman (00:16:14):
Yeah, three years on Halloween, so coming up very soon.

Lenny (00:16:18):
Oh, wow. That's three days from now when we're recording. I wonder when this comes out. I'm curious, at a company like New York Times, which is, I imagine people think when they think product, they think it's the newspaper. At Airbnb we have this challenge where when we talk to hosts, "Here's the product." You're like, "What is your product? Is it our homes?" You have to help people understand, "Okay, when we talk product, we mean the website and app." What do you think of the product at The New York Times? Then, is it a challenge to help people understand, here's what the product team does?

Alex Hardiman (00:16:46):
It's a really good question. At the most basic level, I would say that our product is our journalism, which we then marry with a really compelling and useful user experience, in a way that helps people really act on our journalism so that they can understand and engage with the world around them. For about 150 years, our product was pretty simple. It was a printed newspaper, which is still very beloved today, but the UX of the newspaper was, it was a predictable structure. It was a very finite amount of news. It was time bound, which I think is a really lovely thing in terms of setting expectation. It also has the packaging of the newspaper just such serendipity, where you can move across news, opinion, culture, games.

Alex Hardiman (00:17:31):
It's a really great bounded product in and of itself. But about 25 years ago, when we started shifting over to digital, the web, and mobile, the world just fully opened up in a way. We just saw this really tremendous disaggregation and distribution of our journalism. We really tried to meet the moment by building a wide array of products in the news space to extend our reach. Our products then, our digital products were our website, our apps, newsletters, we dabbled with a lot in the VR/AR space early on. That was, I would say, the first big extension of our products. When we then pivoted though to a subscription model, it was a really interesting moment where we actually had to take more of a destination first approach.

Alex Hardiman (00:18:15):
It was almost like the beginning of us rebundling all of what we did, but on our own destination again, in digital destination. Because in order to build a really thriving subscription business, you really need a direct relationship with your customer as opposed to just relying on platforms to really distribute your coverage. That's where, again, we really started rebundling the breadth and depth of value that people once found in the Sunday newspaper at digital scale. Now, today, our product bundle includes even so much more than news, which I hope we'll talk about a little bit more later. We've really scaled our products in a bunch of different categories where we feel like we can really help people understand and engage with the world.

Alex Hardiman (00:18:57):
We have cooking, we have games, we have sports, we have Wirecutter, which is a great innovation surface. We're playing with a new audio app all around audio journalism. We have now six fully fledged different product destinations. The next thing for us to do is to really figure out how to put those together into a bundle that really becomes the essential subscription for any curious English speaking person around the world, who really wants to know what's happening and wants to be able to, again, act and engage and make great decisions based on the products that we build.

Lenny (00:19:36):
Got it. It sounds like the strategy is a subscription bundle where you just keep bundling awesome stuff into this bundle. It's an obvious thing everyone has, whether you want cooking or games or The New York Times online.

Alex Hardiman (00:19:48):
I think that's right. We did this pretty great exercise and strategy projects over the last year. We took a look and we said, "What is the largest addressable market where The New York Times can be truly valuable every single day to a group of people?" What we found was that there are about 135 million people around the world we believe are willing to pay for the type of high quality journalism based products that the New York Times produces, in the categories of news, gameplay, cooking and recipes, sports, which is why we acquired the athletic shopping recommendations and audio. In order for us to really capture as much of that audience and really serve them well, there are really three things that we need to do to make that essential subscription work.

Alex Hardiman (00:20:37):
The first is we absolutely need to have the best news destination in the world. When you think about the New York Times, we actually have the solar system metaphor where for us news is the sun in the sense that it's why we exist. It is what gives us our brand heritage and reputation. It's what instills trust. It's also where we just have the largest audience when you think about a funnel for our portfolio, and it's also where we just have the most amount of high quality coverage. But then that sun helps you give birth to other satellite planets or products that have a lot of the same DNA. Again, like great trusted journalism, great journalists who just have real expertise.

Alex Hardiman (00:21:16):
A great product experience that allows you to really unlock that value distribution reach, and the other ingredients that you would need for successful products to work. We're really focused on building out beyond news products that really help people engage with their passions and life needs that go beyond news. Then, the third thing is what you're describing as the bundle, how do we create a connected family of products that puts all of those things together so that wherever you come into the New York Times, to news or maybe through Wordle, you know that you're having the best experience within that category.

Alex Hardiman (00:21:49):
But then you also can quickly experience and discover everything else that we offer. That's the strategy and the vision, and it's a huge ambition. We want to get to 15 million subscribers by 2027. We're just over 9 million today, and I really think we can do it.

Lenny (00:22:06):
Awesome. I actually wanted to chat about goals and how you think about success as a product team. I imagine the north star metric is what you just said, which is subscribers. If that's true, what other goals do you have across teams? Maybe even further, I'm packing a lot of questions into one question, but I'm curious just how your product team looks. How many PMs do you have? Roughly, how do you structure the teams? Then, roughly, what kind of goals do they all have to try and imagine the product team at New York Times?

Alex Hardiman (00:22:34):
Let's start with structure. First, I love this question talking about my team because I love hyping them. They're amazing, and our success is truly only as good as our people. Yeah, it is so true. For us, when we think about our org structure, the way to set that up so that our people can really do their best work is that we have two axis. We have functions and then we have missions. I oversee two functions, which is the functions of product and design. The functions themselves, it's normal of what you would find in terms of functional responsibilities. We focus on standards of craft and excellence, career growth, career frameworks, equitable promotion processes, community of practices, skill development, all of that.

Alex Hardiman (00:23:21):
But missions is where a lot of the work happens. These are cross-functional teams, very similar to what we had at a place like Facebook. These cross-functional teams are led by usually a general manager, a product leader, or an engineering leader. They're all pursuing the same high level goals and objectives. Cross-functional missions at the Times, it can include a lot of the same skill sets that you would find at a tech company, PMs, engineers, designers, data scientists, researchers, product marketers. But the big difference is we also have editors, if it's a product space that directly shapes our journalism. I can talk more about that because it's a pretty interesting differentiating factor.

Lenny (00:24:02):
Yeah, that's super interesting. There's a journalist within cross-functional product teams?

Alex Hardiman (00:24:05):
Exactly. But we have three different types of missions. We have consumer missions, we have monetization missions, and we have platform missions. Editors are embedded within consumer missions. Those are the missions that I oversee, where we're focused on creating really great products, again, in categories like news, cooking, games, audio, et cetera. That is where having editors involved, particularly like editors who are very product minded, it brings in the best of their expertise and marries it with a lot of the normal signal that you look for in terms of data research and other insights. When you're trying to make sure that you understand a consumer problem and that you're really finding the best creative solution for it.

Lenny (00:24:48):
Cool.

Alex Hardiman (00:24:49):
It is really cool. It's one of the, I think, most gratifying parts of working at a news organization like the Times. But if you work on a different mission, like a monetization mission, we have two really big ones. One is subscriber growth, the other one that's also really important is digital advertising. They build centralized commercial products that we can then scale across all of the products in our bundle. The subscriber growth team, for instance, they look at making sure that we have really great account ID management for subscribers. If you're buying a subscription through games or through news. Or, if you're on the digital advertising team, you're trying to make sure that we have a first party data program that's really privacy safe, that works as well in cooking as it does in the news space.

Alex Hardiman (00:25:33):
Then, there's a totally different third bucket of mission that we have, which is all of our platform teams. This is everything from monetization platforms like our commerce engine, which is so important, because we're a subscription business, to data platforms where you might have our ML platform or experimentation tooling, to just basic infrastructure. Those are shared across the bundle, which just really helps make it so much easier, more efficient for really engineers to ship code and do their best work. A lot of this actually, I think, probably is pretty familiar to how you might organize at a tech company minus the editors.

Lenny (00:26:14):
Awesome. On that info piece, that reminds me of something I definitely wanted to talk about, which is something New York Times is really known for is the visualizations and these immersive stories that you all put out. I'm so curious just how that gets done. I feel like if I was on a product team at a regular, like a big tech FAANG company, I'd be like, "Shit, all these ad hoc things I got to do for all these stories, such a pain in the butt." That's so important to the New York Times and the online experience. I'm curious just like what is it like to build these things, say the election widgets, and all of that stuff?

Lenny (00:26:47):
Then, I don't know, I was just reading a story about climate change and it's this really beautiful immersive story of just what is happening with the world. There's a bunch of questions there, but I guess roughly just how does that get done, something like that?

Alex Hardiman (00:27:01):
Well, first, thanks for saying that. I really appreciate it. I do think there's something really special about some of the ways that we marry the journalism and the presentation. I want to start just by giving credit where credit's due, which is I think some of the most interesting and inventive and compelling formats, they actually do start off as one-off experiments that are spun up in the newsroom by embedded teams that we have within graphics, visual journalism, interactive news teams. This is where we have editors, journalists, engineers, data scientists, designers, literally all hunkered down together focusing on how to make one story come to life in the best possible way.

Lenny (00:27:37):
Who has the idea usually? Is it like the journalists working on that, they're like, "Hey, I think we should make something really great."

Alex Hardiman (00:27:42):
Exactly. Yeah, one of the things ... We have a newsroom of over 2000 people. You basically have people who've been experts on certain beats like climate, for instance, for decades. They have the nugget of the idea. They start to do reporting and then they really pull in others from visuals, from interactive just to say, "How can I really make sure that I can tell this story with as much impact and weight as possible?" That's where the magic starts to happen, when you pull in all of those other skill sets together to help dream up how that story might be told.

Lenny (00:28:18):
They're like, "Alex, we need one of these for our story. Can you get us on the list?" How does that process go?

Alex Hardiman (00:28:26):
No, no, no. These are teams that are really autonomous in the newsroom. For one-off, truly special features, I'll give you an example of one that I found to be particularly powerful. I don't know if you read Jodi Kantor, who is one of our ... a really incredible investigative reporter. You might know for some of her work that she did around MeToo and Harvey Weinstein, in that investigation.

Lenny (00:28:46):
Yeah.

Alex Hardiman (00:28:47):
She recently did a piece on how employers are tracking and monitoring remote workers with tools like productivity scores. The story itself was designed to show a person's own productivity score in the moment as they read the article.

Lenny (00:29:02):
Oh, shit.

Alex Hardiman (00:29:02):
It was super visceral, really creepy in the most effective way. In my mind, that's the type of magical experience that only happens when you actually have dedicated designers, engineers, and others who can really sit down with a reporter to say, "Let's figure out how to shape that story in the most magical way." The speed of news is so fast that you don't have time to mess with roadmaps. We really have teams who are freed up from some of the normal processes around that, so they can really just focus on storytelling for really big stories and pieces. But on top of that, what we do have is a storytelling product team. What they do is they really take notice of things that are starting to work in more of the experimental phase, some of these one-offs.

Alex Hardiman (00:29:50):
Then, they work closely with editors to test and find product market fit for new formats that can actually scale across many parts of the report, so that over time when you open the app, the app is more accessible, more engaging, because we still have the traditional story based article, but we're also shifting more of the distribution of stories into video, into visuals, into live. If you even look at live, we've broken out of the tyranny of the article in many ways, where you have live reporter updates that are the size of length of tweets. People filing from the ground in Ukraine, trying to give you a sense of what's happening in a very immediate and real way.

Alex Hardiman (00:30:31):
That's where we do have teams, product teams who have to think in two modes. First, they have to be able to think in the moment with editors, where you might not always have all the right data at your fingertips and you just have to make a call, like, "What is the best experience to tell this story in a really truthful, accurate, accessible way?" Then, the other mode is when they're not shipping at the speed of news, they're trying to build end to end systems so that we're building the tooling to actually create the stories at the same time as the consumer experience, which is a totally different mode of system level thinking.

Alex Hardiman (00:31:04):
It's a very cool space. That product team is, they're pulling off some pretty incredible work because they can operate in those two modes. It's like, in the moment, in the moment of the story, but also trying to build the systems that allow you to reshape the composition of storytelling formats that we have across our products over time.

Lenny (00:31:23):
That is super cool. What percentage of these fancy stories are using that platform and building on something that already exists versus a one-off experiment would you say roughly?

Alex Hardiman (00:31:32):
The majority are on our platforms hands down. Yeah. Yeah.

Lenny (00:31:36):
Okay. That makes sense. Then, just so I understand, so you said Jodi was the journalist?

Alex Hardiman (00:31:41):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:31:41):
You mentioned. Does she has a product team dedicated to her work?

Alex Hardiman (00:31:45):
No, what we have is we have a centralized interactive news team, graphics team, data journalism team. Those editors partner with different journalists when they have really big stories to help bring their story to life.

Lenny (00:32:00):
I see. Do they have to come to this team and be like, "Hey, I'd love your time." How does that prioritization ... Because I imagine a lot of journalists are coming to them like, "Hey, my story is going to be awesome. We need you."

Alex Hardiman (00:32:10):
You know what? To be totally honest, I'm not involved. Somehow it works.

Lenny (00:32:19):
That's a great leadership sign. It just works and you set it up and it's working, so that's great.

Alex Hardiman (00:32:25):
Well, and the newsroom has set it up and something that is just, again, very interesting about the way that we are set up is that we have our newsroom and then we have our business side. The business side is where you have all of the product teams and there is intense collaboration between the two, but they do have different leadership structures because that's how we maintain the independence of our coverage. Our product teams sit within the newsroom if they're focused on storytelling, live, anything related to the coverage.

Alex Hardiman (00:32:54):
The only distinction really that I think I'm trying to make is that product teams really help stories find their widest audience and be as engaging and as impactful as can be. But product teams don't have any influence over the selection of the stories. That is what the newsroom retains as editorial.

Lenny (00:33:14):
Okay. You mentioned Wordle and you all acquired Wordle recently. I'm just curious what that was all like. I imagine it's still being integrated. Were you involved in the exploration and purchase process and what went on there?

Alex Hardiman (00:33:28):
Wordle has been such a fun ride. Maybe I'll first just bring you behind the scenes on how the deal came to be, and then we can talk a little bit more about what the integration process has been like.

Lenny (00:33:37):
Yeah, sounds great.

Alex Hardiman (00:33:37):
I first heard about Wordle in early January because a New York Times reporter, Daniel Victor, actually wrote a piece about Josh Wardle, who's a software engineer in Brooklyn, and how he had created the game. It really is this gesture of love for his partner, and I certainly wasn't the only person to read through that column. Everyone inside the New York Times perked up. I remember reaching out to Jonathan Knight, who's the general manager of games, he's on my team. He had already taken notice well before the piece was published, and he had already reached out to Josh to see if he would be interested in having games join our portfolio.

Alex Hardiman (00:34:16):
We just all loved Wordle immediately because if you've played it, it shares a lot of the DNA of other really successful word games that we have at the New York Times, like Spelling Bee or the Crossword Mini. If anything, Josh was really forthright that he created it because he was inspired by those games. Then, in the context of just our subscription strategy, games is such an important category for us. We really see games and demand for games as this, basically, it's a counterpoint to the news. It gives people a chance to actually take a break. It's fun. It doesn't feel like empty calories. It's really time well spent.

Alex Hardiman (00:34:54):
We were just thinking of Wordle as such a wonderful addition to our games franchise to really give people more reasons to feel like they had a relationship with the New York Times every day. The whole thesis of the acquisition just made so much sense. Our team just very quickly engaged with Josh and the acquisition talks were incredibly fast. The whole thing took place in a matter of weeks, which is way faster than any other acquisition I've been a part of. It was a very amicable process. We were just super delighted to bring Wordle on board, but it happened in record speed.

Lenny (00:35:27):
Well, yeah, it felt fast from the outside too. It became a huge deal. Then, "Okay, New York Times buys them." Yeah, it's impressive. You said you acquired Athletic. How often are you acquiring companies?

Alex Hardiman (00:35:37):
We also acquired The Athletic, and that was back in around the same time. I think for now we feel like we actually ... we have all of the major categories to make the essential subscription work. For us to get to 15 million subscribers we really feel like news, sports, games, cooking, audio and shopping, those are the categories, and we just have to make them the best possible versions of themselves, those products, so that we can really provide just tremendous value every day to people. That doesn't mean that we won't make some other acquisitions. The next Wordle would absolutely love to hear about it.

Alex Hardiman (00:36:14):
But I do think there's also a real lesson for a lot of companies, not only about when you acquire what's the opportunity, but also are you ready to actually integrate an acquisition? We learned a lot just around Wordle in terms of what that process is like. I just want to say I'm really proud of how thoughtful and considerate our games team was about the integration process, because Wordle players feel such connection to the game. We really wanted to make sure not to interfere with the core magic of the experience. If you are an eight-year old kid or an 88-year old adult, there's real resonance with Wordle and people just have such a connection to it. We really wanted to make sure we didn't mess it up. Do you want to go a little bit deeper, just almost what that looks like?

Lenny (00:37:00):
Yeah, absolutely.

Alex Hardiman (00:37:01):
Because we definitely learned a lot. When we acquired Wordle, it was a simple web game with no backend. That meant that people's stats and streaks, which was that was the value in terms of social currency that people were sharing after playing, those stats and streaks were stored in local browsers. It was really important for us to make sure that the game board experience in the core loop of the game remained unchanged. But we also found that because everything was stored locally and people care so much about their stats and streaks, if they got a new iPhone, if they switched browsers, all of a sudden they lost all of that history that they had with the game.

Alex Hardiman (00:37:39):
What we decided to do was undertake a project to connect Wordle to a New York Times account, which was free, because Wordle is a free game, just so that it knows who you are and so that your stats and streaks can be protected. Then, we could also bring Wordle to more surfaces because we wanted ... if you go to the homepage of the news app or if you go to the games app, we wanted to make it easier to find because people would come for Spelling Bee or Crosswords and they also wanted their Wordle. It was a pretty big effort to rewrite Wordle in our tech stack, give people the ability to store their stats and streaks, bring games to all of our major surfaces.

Alex Hardiman (00:38:16):
We just tried to do it in a thoughtful way, where we didn't break anything. The experience was hopefully seamless, and that the only thing you would notice that's changed is that the New York Times knows enough about who you are so that your stats carry over and you can play anywhere. But that doesn't mean that there aren't some surprises along the way, especially when you're doing backend work. We had this pretty crazy moment a couple months ago, right when the Supreme Court's draft ruling on Roe v. Wade leaked. An engineer on the games team happened to notice that the Wordle solution the next day was fetus. Which is just an extraordinarily bad coincidence, because the word had been loaded into the game by the game founder months beforehand.

Alex Hardiman (00:39:02):
It was so important for us that we didn't have ... this lovely diversion from the news feel almost like it was commentary on a very contentious story that was happening. I don't know if you caught wind of that, but you'd think that you could easily change the word on the backend, but because we were midstream on the migration process and some users were on the original Wordle game, others had migrated to the new version. It meant that we actually couldn't change the word on the backend for everyone, only for some people. This was a moment where we just had to come out and really tell the world, "We're mid integration. We're really not trying to communicate more than Wordle being a fun diversion from the news. Here's what happened, and why."

Alex Hardiman (00:39:50):
Everyone understood. This is where coming out being really transparent about the facts and in some cases just exposing more about the product development process really helps demystify some of the rumors that people might otherwise think. It was one of those like, "Oh, man, I couldn't have imagined that that type of terrible coincidence would happen." But you just have to be prepared for everything, even when you're integrating what should just be a fun game.

Lenny (00:40:16):
Imagine, no matter what you tell people, some folks are just not going to believe a very simple explanation of what was going on.

Alex Hardiman (00:40:23):
It's true. All you can do is be as honest and transparent. What I will say is a lot of people still think we try to make Wordle harder, we don't, I promise. It's not a thing.

Lenny (00:40:33):
Yeah, it's not like the crossword puzzle where it gets harder every day of the week.

Alex Hardiman (00:40:38):
No, no. It's not, it's not.

Lenny (00:40:43):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold.

Lenny (00:41:17):
If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table. Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious, and expensive. Enter Vanta, over 3000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off of Vanta.

Lenny (00:41:49):
Just go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today. Are there any other stories that come to mind that reflect just how interesting/wild it is to work at the New York Times as a product leader?

Alex Hardiman (00:42:12):
If we could of go back to when I started at the New York Times, because I started in late 2019, it was just right before the pandemic. It was pretty wild to come back to the company and to get shifted into this moment of needing to build products that really were trying to help people through the moment. At a time when our journalists were covering the story and all of New York Times' employees were trying to live through it. It was COVID 24/7 in terms of work and life. For me, I remember in the earliest days when we were first really reporting on COVID and learning about it, we had reporters on the ground in Wuhan even before we knew how COVID was transmitted.

Alex Hardiman (00:42:52):
Then, when the world shut down, for the Times, we went fully remote in March, 2020, and I remember the day so well because it was the beginning of spring break, of course, all plans were canceled. My kids, I had no idea what to do with them. My husband and I panic packed, put them in a car, drove to go see some friends in Vermont, and we decided we were going to do a kid daycare pool share just to figure out how to keep working with someone overseeing the kids. We got there late at night and I literally just went into a laundry closet and I didn't emerge for two weeks because my Slack was blowing up about all of the work that we needed to do to make our products as useful as possible.

Alex Hardiman (00:43:32):
The kids were being crazy and we just had to get to work. What was really stunning about this moment in time was that as people were getting sick and we were reporting about all of the trends that we were seeing, we saw that other institutions, especially the government, were not actually stepping up to help people understand the basic facts about what was happening. This is a product leader, it's a real wartime moment where you just need to blow up roadmaps, share context with everyone and say, "Okay, everyone, we have a totally different mandate than what we did a couple weeks ago." Given the needs in the world and the mission of the New York Times and our purpose, which is to help people access information to make informed decision about their lives, we're going to do a whole bunch of these things.

Alex Hardiman (00:44:17):
We're going to build a comprehensive public data set of COVID cases. Nobody else is doing it. We really just started scraping and pulling this together, and what was a single spreadsheet at the time. We pulled a bunch of engineers from other teams to go help build out that database. We launched entirely new formats and data tools to make our journalism a lot more easier to follow. Things like tools to be able to look up infection rates and eventually vaccination rates down at your local zip code level. We made our most important COVID coverage free to everybody. It was really important that if it was something related to public safety, we didn't put it behind a paywall.

Alex Hardiman (00:44:53):
Our mission is to do better than that. We really made sure that we had that information available to everyone. We also just found that for journalists who hadn't actually been in Wuhan, they just needed tips to an internal safety guidance for reporting, and so we made that publicly available. It was just one of those really interesting moments where everything felt so crazy in this moment of crisis. But building purposeful products that made a really difficult moment feel not only possible but promising, was one of the most unifying moments, I would say, for our teams.

Alex Hardiman (00:45:29):
Because even though people were working so hard and balancing work life and personal life, no one doubted for a second that the work they were doing was of greater good for the world. There's real privilege in being able to spend your time doing those things. But it's one of the biggest news stories of our lifetime and to be at the forefront of that, I think for all of us, was a pretty incredible and humbling experience.

Lenny (00:45:55):
Wow. People talk about having impact and driving impact and it's usually like, move this metric some percentage, but that is some incredible impact. Helping people avoid COVID, avoid dying, keeping their families safe. It's got to be some of the most fulfilling work that you and your team has done and ideally it wouldn't have happened, but it was also probably incredibly fulfilling.

Alex Hardiman (00:46:20):
Thank you for saying that. One of the most validating tricks that we did look at was we realized that at the height of the pandemic, when there was just so much confusion about literally what to do, how to live each day in March, 2020, we saw that half of the country came to the New York Times. There is something again that is just so powerful about very straightforward data journalism, deep reporting, service guidance on how to make a mask if you don't have one. Just like all of these basics. Just seeing the whole organization pivot from their normal job into this mode and was pretty incredible, and the world responded, which was really validating too.

Lenny (00:47:00):
I imagine there's also a bit of burnout that happens working, where it goes on and on and on. You're like, "Oh, my God, when is this going to slow down?" How do you help people avoid burnout? How do you catch burnout as a leader on a product team?

Alex Hardiman (00:47:15):
This is one of the most honestly, hard and important topics that I think we're always still grappling with. As a company, we really did try to lead originally with giving people more time off, more support, like financial support and other assistance with daycare, health benefits, all of the basics. I think now what we're really trying to do beyond that is be so much more focused on the things that we need to do and all of the things that we're really happy to stop doing. Because part of, I think, context switching is one of the things that is really, really difficult. It's hard to context switch in your job.

Alex Hardiman (00:47:53):
It's really hard to context switch across your job and your life. There are a lot of things that we as a company can't necessarily control in people's lives, but within the job, the places where we can be so much more focused and thoughtful about the small number of important things that we must do at a given point in time, that's really the place where we're really trying to come in and be as empathetic and as honest about what we need to do and what we don't need to do. A lot of it really comes down to, I think, making hard calls. We're not always perfect at it. I'm sure that there are things that we could be more diligent about.

Alex Hardiman (00:48:27):
But I would say over on balance, we've seen a lot of people stay at the company because they're figuring out they work remotely, maybe they come back to the office. They're figuring out how to live their life in a very different way from a couple of years ago. We're really here to try to meet them and make that as possible as possible. We need incredible people across a bunch of different skill sets, a bunch of different backgrounds. The only way to do that is to really be very flexible and accommodating in terms of trying to meet people where they are in their lives, but it's tricky.

Alex Hardiman (00:49:03):
There is no perfect answer for this, but we're really trying because the success of the company only works when we have people who feel valued and they can do their best work and live really rich lives on top of that. I think we're all still figuring out what that looks like now that we're starting to come out of the official pandemic and really just learning how to live with COVID.

Lenny (00:49:23):
Right, absolutely. You mentioned that you're all remote now. Is that the policy going forward?

Alex Hardiman (00:49:29):
We actually just started going back into the office a couple of days per week, which is very encouraged. We're still finding our groove. We do have a good number of people though who are fully remote as well. It's more of an evolution in terms of trying to find the right balance of taking advantage of in-person work, because there are some moments where it really does make such a difference when you have people together working through hard problems in real life. That camaraderie, those relationships really, really do matter. Also, being realistic about the fact that there are a lot of people who would love to work at the New York Times, but might not be able to live in the New York City area.

Alex Hardiman (00:50:11):
So, how do we make sure that we can be a remote friendly company for them too? Yeah, so we're very hybrid, we're still testing our way through it. But by and large, we're shipping so much tremendous work, which I think is a reflection of us being able to do the hybrid thing and just try to get better and better at it each day, each week.

Lenny (00:50:30):
Yeah, it's hard. As an outsider, I can't imagine a New York Times being all remote. It feels like that kind of company just, it's all happening in a building somewhere probably. I'm also a big fan of in-person, it feels like as a company, it feels like you have an advantage if you're working in-person generally.

Alex Hardiman (00:50:46):
We certainly see that, and so the center of gravity is in New York and is in the office, but again, with a lot of flexibility for people's lives. We're really trying to figure out that balance.

Lenny (00:50:58):
Just a couple more questions before we get to our very exciting lightning round. Where's the New York Times in the next five, 10 years as a product specifically different from other folks? Then, broadly, I don't know, if you have any insights or opinions on just what is the future of news, do share.

Alex Hardiman (00:51:13):
I think the New York Times is in a pretty unique spot compared to other news organizations right now. I have tremendous respect for other high quality organizations like The Journal and The Post and The FT and The Guardian. They're just doing such incredible work. But when I go back to what differentiates us, it's this idea of becoming an essential subscription that really helps people. It meets their most important news and life needs across all of the categories that we've been talking about, like news, games, audio, cooking, et cetera.

Alex Hardiman (00:51:44):
Up until, I would say, this year we were more of a news brand with a collection of adjacent lifestyle products, but with the acquisition of Wordle and the Athletic, along with just the continued growth of cooking and Wirecutter and some of our other offerings, I really do think that has transformed us into a brand capable of really being that essential subscription that helps every single day people with news and life needs in a way that doesn't just associate the New York Times with [inaudible 00:52:12] categories. Imagine that you open the New York Times app and you are starting with a great breaking news story. Then, you skip over to the latest coverage in China.

Alex Hardiman (00:52:25):
Then, you decide that you want to take a small break to play Spelling Bee, and then you want to plan a Korean dinner party with Eric Kim, who I don't know if you know has some of the best Korean recipes. He's amazing. Then, you're like, "Wow, I need a rice cooker to be able to make that recipe, so I need to go get the best recommendation from Wirecutter."

Lenny (00:52:43):
I just did exactly that, actually.

Alex Hardiman (00:52:45):
Did you?

Lenny (00:52:45):
Yeah.

Alex Hardiman (00:52:47):
Then, I would love to go watch the Britney Spears documentary, which is also part of the New York Times franchise, which is amazing. Or, I want to go listen to Kevin Roose and Casey Newton's Hard Fork podcast, which is wildly fun and just launched a couple weeks ago, if you haven't heard that. This is, I think, the future for us of being a connected family of products, where we can meet so many different needs that are first anchored in news, but then stretched into other facets of your lives. I don't really see other news organizations really operating at that scale and that ambition, and that's the future for us.

Alex Hardiman (00:53:24):
We really just think that the New York Times can mean so much more to so many more people. We're a journalism company, but we're building just tremendous software, and so the product ambitions are only getting bigger and bigger, and that's why I feel like I've got the luckiest job in the world right now.

Lenny (00:53:42):
That is a compelling vision. I feel like you can build your own metaverse in the New York Times where you just spend all of your days inside the New York Times' suite of products.

Alex Hardiman (00:53:52):
Can I say though, there is a big difference. I think that for us our software actually helps people with real world outcomes in a very different way. We basically help you get access to information, decide how you're going to go to the ballot box. We give you information to go cook. Actually, there's something that I think is even more of a connection to the physical world, and it is very different from what the Metaverse is doing, but that's where we feel like we can drive as much impact as possible.

Lenny (00:54:20):
You can have your own competing metaverse. Here's a quick Wirecutter suggest idea for you, while we're chatting. I feel like Wirecutter, I use it all the time, everything I buy is based on Wirecutter recommendations, but I feel like there's an opportunity for design oriented version of Wirecutter. I don't know if anyone's thinking about that.

Alex Hardiman (00:54:37):
Tell me more.

Lenny (00:54:38):
Just Wirecutter's functional stuff. It's like, "Here's the best, I don't know, rice cooker." But like, what's the cutest but also the best? What's the cross section of looks good in my house and is the best. I'll be okay not the best best if it looks nicer, so a design lens to Wirecutter.

Alex Hardiman (00:54:54):
If it's Wirecutter meets high taste, basically. I like that. I like that. Okay.

Lenny (00:55:02):
I think there's a market there.

Alex Hardiman (00:55:04):
I'll definitely bring that back to the team. That's a good one.

Lenny (00:55:06):
There you go. Well, we've reached our very exciting lightning round where I'm just going to ask you, I have six questions, I'll get through them pretty quick. Whatever comes to mind, fire off. We'll go through it fast and fun. Sound good?

Alex Hardiman (00:55:21):
Great.

Lenny (00:55:21):
Okay. What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Alex Hardiman (00:55:27):
I love Stripe Press, and so I think a lot of the books that they have are just such good references, like Elad Gill's High Growth Handbook, or Will Larson's An Elegant Puzzle. Then, some of the more topical ones like Revolt of the Public. I just find that they're evergreen in terms of their utility. Anyone can find value in them. I just loved the craft of the books themselves. They are amazing products in terms of the content and the form, so those are, in the product context and work context, those are hands down I would say the places where I go first.

Alex Hardiman (00:56:01):
But I do think, and I know this is this humanities major in me, I also always try to balance books and my own reading time and recommendations with fiction. I just think it's actually like, sometimes some of the best ideas and inspiration come when you go one or two steps away from the core books that are related to your practice. Right now, I'm actually rereading Giovanni's Room by James Baldwin. It's just so beautiful and so lyrical and it gets at more components of the human soul that, I know it sounds crazy, but I find like those are little sparks of ideas that ultimately come back into making products, and particularly news products where they're so creative in the way that they tell stories.

Alex Hardiman (00:56:46):
I always try to give people one pragmatic recommendation and then one slightly more field recommendation over in the world of fiction. If you haven't read Giovanni's Room, it is incredible and devastating, and I absolutely recommend it.

Lenny (00:57:00):
Wow. I feel like I just keep buying books after doing these podcasts. I have so many books I got to read. I'm also feeling like the combination of books you recommended is exactly what I would imagine someone leading product at New York Times would recommend, something product tactical and then just a beautiful piece of fiction.

Alex Hardiman (00:57:18):
I'm the cliché. I love it.

Lenny (00:57:21):
Great. No, no, no. I wouldn't put it that way. Okay. What's a favorite other podcast that you like to listen to? You mentioned one already, is that the one?

Alex Hardiman (00:57:28):
Everyone should listen to Hard Fork. It's great. But I just think The Daily continues to be, and again, I know it sounds self-serving, but being able to just listen to Michael Barbaro and Sabrina Tavernise once a day, just bring in journalists to talk and unpack a meaningful story, it's so visceral. I just find it to be one of the daily miracles that the New York Times is able to produce.

Lenny (00:57:51):
Yeah, that's wild. I can't imagine a daily thing like that doing that. Impressive. What's a recent favorite movie or TV show that you've seen that you've really enjoyed?

Alex Hardiman (00:58:01):
I am pretty old school. I am actually rewatching The Wire for the third time.

Lenny (00:58:06):
Wow. That's a lot of time commitment.

Alex Hardiman (00:58:09):
It is. I have very little time, but every five years my husband and I, we just can't get over the characters, the storylines. It's just one of the best made series for television ever. It's a work of art, and so I am that person, that is another cliché, who is rewatching The Wire right now.

Lenny (00:58:27):
What's your favorite season?

Alex Hardiman (00:58:28):
I would probably say it's season three, but when Stringer Bell passes away, it's the culmination of just so much. I probably shouldn't say that for anyone who hasn't seen The Wire. Oh, that's like the worst thing ever.

Lenny (00:58:43):
Spoiler alert in reverse.

Alex Hardiman (00:58:45):
Spoiler alert. I'm so sorry.

Lenny (00:58:46):
But that's not the character name, that's the actor, right?

Alex Hardiman (00:58:49):
No, no, I really just totally spoiled that.

Lenny (00:58:51):
Okay, that's cool. If you haven't seen it at this point, it's over, your loss.

Alex Hardiman (00:58:56):
Oh, boy. How awful. That's like a cardinals sin. But I do think season four, when it starts to get into the school system is also just, the actors are incredible. It's some of the best acting that I think has existed over the last couple of decades. Again, if you haven't seen it, please do yourself a favor and watch it. It's worth every episode.

Lenny (00:59:16):
Would you agree season two is the worst?

Alex Hardiman (00:59:19):
I thought that until I re-watched it.

Lenny (00:59:22):
Interesting.

Alex Hardiman (00:59:22):
I actually came around and it's not at the top of my list, but there's more to it than I think I originally gave it credit for.

Lenny (00:59:30):
Wow. I like this. Okay, great. What are four to five SaaS products that you or company uses most that you find really useful?

Alex Hardiman (00:59:39):
Probably pretty classic, we use G-Suite, Slack, Figma, Mode, GitHub. Those are the ones that I think just get hands down the most amount of usage across our teams.

Lenny (00:59:51):
The fourth one was Mode?

Alex Hardiman (00:59:52):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:59:53):
Is there any interesting new recent one that's like top of mind while we're on this topic?

Alex Hardiman (00:59:58):
Not really. No.

Lenny (01:00:02):
Okay, great. The winners keep winning, huh? These products?

Alex Hardiman (01:00:07):
Yeah. If anything, it's like when you don't talk about the SaaS products you use, I feel like that's more of a success because it's just, it works behind the scenes, it blends in and it just makes everyone so much more productive.

Lenny (01:00:19):
Yeah. Imagine all these companies have the New York Times logo on their site of people using that.

Alex Hardiman (01:00:24):
Maybe.

Lenny (01:00:24):
That would be a big deal when you guys adopt a product. Final question. Who else in the industry do you most respect as a thought leader and thinker?

Alex Hardiman (01:00:32):
This is a hard question, but I would say one of the people who I find to just be a really tremendous product thinker, leader, and ally for women is Fidji Simo. I was lucky enough to work with her and for her when I was at Facebook and just watching the way that she ... what she did with Facebook, what she then is doing at Instacart and the way that she really just helps so many other women in the field figure out how to be better at their craft, how to have more opportunity. I don't know how she has these many hours in her day, but she's pretty incredible, so I would love to give a shout out to her.

Lenny (01:01:10):
Awesome. I will try to get her on this podcast.

Alex Hardiman (01:01:13):
Oh, that would be amazing. All right. She's really-

Lenny (01:01:15):
That's what I need to do. Awesome. Good recommendation. Alex, this was amazing. I learned so much. This is such a fun conversation. Thank you, again, for doing this. Two last questions, where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more? Maybe think about working at the New York Times and otherwise, how can listeners be useful to you?

Alex Hardiman (01:01:32):
Thanks. You can find me on Twitter, LinkedIn, all the usual channels. I would love to hear from anyone and would be delighted to also talk about what it's like to do product at the Times. Then, the thing that would be really useful is what is the one feature that would make the New York Times more essential and more valuable to you in your daily life? I would love to hear from people on that front.

Lenny (01:01:53):
All right. I shared mine, a design-oriented Wirecutter. I will be looking for that.

Alex Hardiman (01:01:59):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:01:59):
Awesome. Thank you, Alex.

Alex Hardiman (01:02:00):
No, of course. There's just one other whole theme, and I don't know if you want to chat through it, which is, what are some of the similarities and differences between product management in news organization?

Lenny (01:02:14):
Let's do it.

Alex Hardiman (01:02:14):
It's totally up to you. But if that's something that you'd be interested in talking through.

Lenny (01:02:20):
Absolutely.

Alex Hardiman (01:02:21):
I'm going to just focus on two themes that I think are pretty interesting. The first is just how we work at the New York Times, and we talked a little bit about working with journalism, and there are some really interesting differences. The second is just on the idea of impact. I think how the definition and the understanding of impact can be pretty different. First, just on the idea of how we work, there are a lot of similarities. I would say that product managers at the Times and at tech companies, they have a lot of the same skills. Like, we look for a great product sense, great execution, great leadership and drive.

Alex Hardiman (01:02:59):
Any good PM needs to know their industry, their customers, their market, their business, et cetera. We actually do see a lot of crossover between product managers from tech companies who come to the New York Times or tech PMs at the Times who go over to tech companies. I think that that's wonderful, but a key difference of when you're a product manager working at the New York Times is that you work across the full stack of the product. Meaning, we own our journalism and our content. We own our distribution and we own our products. That's really different from working at a big tech platform. When I was at Facebook, we controlled the software and the distribution, but we didn't control the content.

Alex Hardiman (01:03:39):
We had real limitations on understanding what was passing through. Was it high quality content, low quality content? It just led to, again, a lot of challenges that we already talked about. At the Times, when I think about how our best products are born, it's when you bring journalism and product lovers together. That means that PMs at the Times really need to understand the blend of art and science. They really need to value expert editorial judgment as they're also looking at individual KPIs, customer research and insights, et cetera. An interesting example, as I was trying to think about what would feel really different doing product at the Times compared to say Facebook is like, let's say you're at the product team and you're working on the home screen.

Alex Hardiman (01:04:25):
We always start with expert editorial judgment to curate the most important and interesting stories. But on top of that, we're training algorithms on specific data sets, like editorial important scores that actually come from our journalists. What that allows us to do is actually scale editorial judgment to a large group of readers. Those algorithms, what I think is just really great is they're trained on editorial signal and then they can still work towards driving towards outcomes like reach, engagement, conversion, et cetera. That's just such a different way of thinking. When I was at Facebook and we were focused on news ranking and feed, all we could do was train pieces of in information based on an engagement outcome.

Alex Hardiman (01:05:12):
We couldn't actually train it based on the quality of that piece of information itself. At the Times you get all, you have 2000 plus journalists and you're actually trying to structure their expertise into things that can actually translate into really great algorithmic decisioning, and that's just so different. No one else is really doing something in that space. Product managers are becoming very editorially minded and we're also getting editors to become more product minded. I just think that how we work there is so different and so unique. It's just a pretty fascinating part of, I think, how the sausage is made, if that makes sense.

Lenny (01:05:46):
Yeah. Thanks for sharing that. I think that's really important topic of just how it's different and why it's worth considering trying something like the New York Times as a place to work. What's interesting about what you're talking about, this also reminds me ironically of Substack, where they also are anti-algorithms and are also very focused on people and people recommending other people and just like individuals. I don't know if we want to get into this, but I guess do you have a opinion of Substack as a medium? Because folks leave New York Times to work on Substack, they come back. My whole living is on Substack. Any thoughts on the world of Substack?

Alex Hardiman (01:06:25):
Well, a couple of things. First, it's not that we're anti-algorithm on the New York Times front, it's just that we want our algorithms to reflect editorial judgment. That's really different. When it comes to Substack, actually, I think a lot of what Substack is doing is great. The idea of writers being able to make a living individually off of their craft, I think, is fantastic. The thing that I get excited about for Substack, but also for a company like the New York Times is trust right now with institutions has been declining, with governments, with religious institutions, with news organizations.

Alex Hardiman (01:07:00):
But trust with individual experts, where you have a real relationship, that really matters. That I think is one of the big unlocks in terms of helping the next generation of readers really start to create more of a relationship with high quality journalists and writers who have really important things to say about the world. I think whatever is happening in the world that helps great writers find their audiences, make a living, is wonderful. At the New York Times, a lot of what we're trying to do is, it's not the Substack model, but we have a lot more that we're doing to actually help get individual journalists out there.

Alex Hardiman (01:07:39):
They have their own subscribe only newsletters, podcasts. We're really trying to help them find a way to create a mini platform within the means and the scale of the New York Times. It's not quite the Substack model, but I do think that there's some interesting similarities, and the more that artists and creatives can help make a living, I think, it's just fantastic.

Lenny (01:08:00):
I'm here for it. I love this two-part encore bonus we just did. Anything else that you want to share before we wrap up?

Alex Hardiman (01:08:10):
I think the only other thing that I have come to learn when you're doing product management at a news organization compared to a place like Facebook is just how different the definition of impact can be. When I was at Facebook, we were incredibly focused on scale, engagement, and revenue, which is very appropriate. At a company like the New York Times, we also have a huge ambition to grow our subscriber base. But one thing that's really interesting is that our impact and our business goals are in service of our mission, which is to seek the truth and help people understand the world, not the other way around.

Alex Hardiman (01:08:51):
What it means is that the way that we think about impact is growing a giant subscription business. That business exists to strengthen an informed democracy at a time when people are struggling to understand basic facts and struggling to understand each other. That means that impact for us is growing subscribers, but it's also when a deeply reported story triggers an important policy change or a new law. When you're a product manager you're involved, again, in driving specific metrics like engagement or subscribers.

Alex Hardiman (01:09:26):
But you're also trying to help stories find their real audience in ways that trigger just this whole different side of mission and purpose driven impact. I didn't feel that when I was at a place like Facebook, but at the Times, I think it just gives product managers a bit of a broader aperture in the ways that they think about the relationship between business goals and mission impact goals, and it's pretty cool.

Lenny (01:09:50):
It does feel like it would be hard to find more meaningful, impactful work, and so that really resonates.

Alex Hardiman (01:09:57):
Oh, thanks. There are so many other important purposeful products and problems out there to solve in the world. We've talked about this, Lenny, but I just think that product managers and product thinking in so many contexts inside and outside of tech has never been more important in the world than right now. We need product managers everywhere diagnosing key problems and issues, coming up with radically novel solutions. This is the moment. It's really great to have your podcast and so many other resources out there to help new and other PMs just do their best craft. Thank you for having all of us in here.

Lenny (01:10:33):
I love that as a closing thought. Alex, thank you again so much for doing this.

Alex Hardiman (01:10:37):
Thank you so much, Lenny. This was really fun.

Lenny (01:10:40):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You lead work on Codex.

Alexander Embiricos (00:00:01):
Codex is OpenAI's coding agent. We think of Codex as just the beginning of a software engineering teammate. It's a bit like this really smart intern that refuses to read Slack, doesn't check Datadog unless you ask it to.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:12):
I remember Karpathy tweeted the gnarliest bugs that he runs into that he just spends hours trying to figure out nothing else has solved, he gives it to Codex, lets it run for an hour and it solves it.

Alexander Embiricos (00:00:21):
Starting to see glimpses of the future where we're actually starting to have Codex be on call for its own training. Codex writes a lot of the code that helps manage its training run, the key infrastructure. So we have a Codex code review that's catching a lot of mistakes. It's actually caught some pretty interesting configuration mistakes. One of the most mind-blowing examples of acceleration, the Sora Android app, like a fully new app, we built it in 18 days and then 10 days later, so 28 days total, we went to the public.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:45):
How do you think you win in this space?

Alexander Embiricos (00:00:47):
One of our major goals with Codex is to get to proactivity. If we're going to build a super system, has to be able to do things. One of the learnings over the past year is that for models to do stuff, they're much more effective when they can use a computer. It turns out the best way for models to use computers is simply to write code. And so we're kind of getting to this idea where if you want to build any agent, maybe you should be building a coding agent.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:04):
When you think about progress on Codex, I imagine you have a bunch of evals and there's all these public benchmarks.

Alexander Embiricos (00:01:10):
A few of us are constantly on Reddit. There's praise up there and there's a lot of complaints. What we can do is as a product team just try to always think about how are we building a tool so that it feels like we're maximally accelerating people rather than building a tool that makes it more unclear what you should do as the human?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:24):
Being at OpenAI, I can't not ask about how far you think we are from AGI.

Alexander Embiricos (00:01:28):
The current underappreciated limiting factor is literally human typing speed or human multitasking speed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:35):
Today, my guest is Alexander Embiricos, product lead for Codex, OpenAI's incredibly popular and powerful coding agent. In the words of Nick Turley, head of ChatGPT and former podcast guest, "Alex is one of my all time favorite humans I've ever worked with, and bringing him and his company into OpenAI ended up being one of the best decisions we've ever made." Similarly, Kevin Weil, OpenAI's CPO, said, "Alex is simply the best."

(00:01:59):
In our conversation, we chat about what it's truly like to build product at OpenAI, how Codex allowed the Sora team to ship the Sora app, which became the number one app in the app store in under one month. Also, the 20x growth Codex is seeing right now and what they did to make it so good at coding, why his team is now focused on making it easier to review code, not just write code, his AGI timelines, his thoughts on when AI agents will actually be really useful, and so much more. A huge thank you to Ed Bayes, Nick Turley, and Dennis Yang for suggesting topics for this conversation. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 19 incredible products, including a year free of Devin, Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD, Mobbin, PostHog, and Stripe Atlas. Head on over to lennysnewsletter.com and click Product Pass.

(00:02:55):
With that, I bring you Alexander Embiricos, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:03:00):
Here's a puzzle for you. What do OpenAI, Cursor, Perplexity, Vercel, Plaid, and hundreds of other winning companies have in common? The answer is they're all powered by today's sponsor, WorkOS. If you're building software for enterprises, you've probably felt the pain of integrating single sign-on, SCIM, RBAC, audit logs, and other features required by big customers. WorkOS turns those deal blockers into drop-in APIs with a modern developer platform built specifically for B2B SaaS. Whether you're a seed stage startup trying to land your first enterprise customer or a unicorn expanding globally, WorkOS is the fastest path to becoming enterprise ready and unlocking growth. They're essentially Stripe for enterprise features. Visit workos.com to get started or just hit up their Slack support where they have real engineers in there who answer your questions super fast. WorkOS allows you to build like the best, with delightful APIs, comprehensive docs and a smooth developer experience. Go to workos.com to make your app enterprise ready today.

(00:04:01):
This episode is brought to you by Fin, the number one AI agent for customer service. If your customer support tickets are piling up, then you need Fin. Fin is the highest performing AI agent on the market with a 65% average resolution rate. Fin resolves even the most complex customer queries. No other AI agent performs better. In head to head bake offs with competitors, Fin wins every time. Yes, switching to a new tool can be scary, but Fin works on any help desk with no migration needed, which means you don't have to overhaul your current system or deal with delays in service for your customers. And Fin is trusted by over 6,000 customer service leaders and top companies like Anthropic, Shutterstock, Synthesia, Clay, Vanta, Lovable, Monday.com and more. And because Fin is powered by the Fin AI Engine, which is a continuously improving system that allows you to analyze, train, test, and deploy with ease, Fin can continuously improve your results too. So if you're ready to transform your customer service and scale your support, give Fin a try for only 99 cents per resolution. Plus Fin comes with a 90-day money back guarantee. Find out how Fin can work for your team at fin.ai/Lenny. That's fin.ai/lenny.

(00:05:14):
Alexander, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Alexander Embiricos (00:05:18):
Thank you so much. I've been following for ages and I'm excited to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:21):
I'm even more excited. I really appreciate that. I want to start with your time at OpenAI. So you joined OpenAI about a year ago. Before that, you had your own startup for about five years. Before that, you were a product manager at Dropbox. I imagine OpenAI is very different from every other place you've worked. Let me just ask you this, what is most different about how OpenAI operates and what's something that you've learned there that you think you're going to take with you wherever you go, assuming you ever leave?

Alexander Embiricos (00:05:49):
By far, I would say the speed and ambition of working at OpenAI are just dramatically more than what I can imagine. And I guess it's kind of an embarrassing thing to say because everyone who's a startup founder thinks like, "Oh yeah, my startup moves super fast and the talent bar is super high and we're super ambitious." But I have to say, working in OpenAI just made me reimagine what that even means.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:11):
We hear this a lot about feels like every AI company is just like, "Oh my God, I can't believe how fast they're moving." Is there an example of just like, "Wow, that wouldn't have happened this quickly anywhere else"?

Alexander Embiricos (00:06:20):
The most obvious thing that comes to mind is just the explosive growth of Codex itself. I think it's a while since we bumped our external number, but it's like the 10x-ing of Codex's scale was just super fast in a matter of months and it's well more since then. And once you've lived through that, or at least speaking for myself, having lived through that now, I feel like anytime I'm going to spend my time on building tech product, there's that speed and scale that I now need to meet.

(00:06:52):
If I think of what I was doing in my startup, it moved way slower and there's always this balance with startups of how much do you commit to an idea that you have versus find out that it's not working and then pivot. But I think one thing I've realized at OpenAI is the amount of impact that we can have and, in fact, need to have to do a good job is so high that I have to be way more ruthless with how I spend my time now.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:15):
Before we get to Codex, is there a way that they've structured the org or, I don't know, the way that OpenAI operates that allows the team to move this quickly? Because everyone wants to move super fast. I imagine there's a structural approach to allowing this to happen.

Alexander Embiricos (00:07:29):
I mean, so one thing is just the technology that we're building with has just transformed so many things from both how we build, but also what kinds of things we can enable for users. And we spend most of our time talking about the sort of improvements within the foundation models, but I believe that even if we had no more progress today with models, which is absolutely not the case, but even if we had no more progress, we are way behind on product. There's so much more product to build. So I think just the moment is ripe, if that makes sense.

(00:08:01):
But I think there's a lot of counterintuitive things that surprised me when I arrived as far as how things are structured. One example that comes to mind is when I was working on my startup and before that, when I was at Dropbox, it was very important, especially as a PM to always rally the ship and it was like make sure you're pointed in the right direction and then you can accelerate in that direction. But here, I think because we don't exactly know what capabilities will even come up soon and we don't know what's going to work technically, and then we also don't know what's going to land even if it works technically, it's much more important for us to be very humble and learn a lot more empirically and just try things quickly. And the org is set up in that way to be incredibly bottoms up.

(00:08:45):
This is, again, one of those things that, as you were saying, everyone wants to move fast. I think everyone likes to say that they're bottoms up, or at least a lot of people do, but OpenAI is truly, truly bottoms up. And that's been a learning experience for me that now it'll be interesting if I ever work at... I don't think it'll even make sense to work at a non-AI company in the future. I don't even know what that means. But if I were to imagine it or go back in time, I think I would run things totally new.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:10):
What I'm hearing is this ready, fire, aim is the approach more than ready, aim, fire. And there's something, and as you process that, because that may not come across well, but I actually have heard this a lot at AI companies is because you don't know, and Nick Turley shared I think the same sentiment, because you don't know how people will use it it doesn't make sense to spend a lot of time making it perfect. It's better to just get it out there in a primordial way, see how people use it, and then go big on that use case.

Alexander Embiricos (00:09:39):
Yeah. Okay, to use this analogy a little bit, I feel like there is an aim component, but the aim component is much fuzzier. It's kind of like, roughly what do we think can happen? Someone I've learned a ton from working here is a research lead, and he likes to say that at OpenAI, we can have really good conversations about something that's a year plus from now, and there's a lot of ambiguity in what will happen, but that's a right sort of timeline. And then we can have really good conversations about what's happening in low months or weeks. But there's this awkward middle ground, which was as you start approaching a year, but you're not at a year where it's very difficult to reason about, right?

(00:10:18):
And so as far as aiming, I think we want to know, "Okay, what are some of the futures that we're trying to build towards?" And a lot of the problems we're dealing with in AI, such as alignment are problems you need to be thinking out really far out into the future. So we're kind of aiming fuzzily there, but when it comes down to the more tactically like, "Oh yeah, what product will we build and therefore how will people use that product?" That's the place where we're much more like, "Let's find out empirically."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:41):
That's a good way of putting it. Something else that when people hear this, people sometimes hear companies like yours saying, "Okay, we're going to be bottoms up. We're going to try a bunch of stuff. We're not going to have exactly a plan of where it's going in the next few months." The key is you all hire the best people in the world. And so that feels like a really key ingredient in order to be this successful at bottoms up work.

Alexander Embiricos (00:11:02):
It just super resonates with me. I was just, again, surprised or even shocked when I arrived at the level of individual drive and autonomy that everyone here has. So I think the way that OpenAI runs, you can't read this or listen to a podcast and be like, "I'm just going to deploy this to my company." Maybe this is a harsh thing to say, but I think very few companies have the talent caliber to be able to do that. So it might need to be adjusted if you were going to implement this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:34):
Okay. So let's talk Codex. You lead work on Codex. How's Codex going? What numbers can you share? Is there anything you can share there? Also, just not everyone knows exactly what Codex is, explain what Codex is.

Alexander Embiricos (00:11:45):
Totally, yeah. So I had the very lucky job of living in the future and leading products on Codex. And Codex is OpenAI's coding agent. So super concretely, that means it's an IDE extension, a VS code extension that you can install or a terminal tool that you can install. And when you do so, you can then basically pair with Codex to answer questions about code, write code, run tests, execute code, and do a bunch of the work in that thick middle section of the software development lifecycle, which is all about writing code that you're going to get into production.

(00:12:21):
More broadly, we think of Codex as what it currently is just the beginning of a software engineering teammate. So when we use a big word like teammate, some of the things we're imagining are that it's not only able to write code, but actually it participates early on in the ideation and planning phases of writing software and then further downstream in terms of validation, deploying and maintaining code.

(00:12:46):
To make that a little more fun, one thing I like to imagine is if you think of what Codex is today, it's a bit like this really smart intern that refuses to read Slack and doesn't check Datadog or Century unless you ask it to. And so no matter how smart it is, how much are you going to trust it to write code without you also working with it? So that's how people use it mostly today is they pair with it. But we want to get to the point where it can work just like a new intern that you hire, you don't only ask them to write code, but you ask them to participate across the cycle. So you know that even if they don't get something right the first try, they're eventually going to be able to iterate their rate there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:21):
I thought the point about not reading Slack and Datadog was it's just not distracted, it's just constantly focused and is always in flow. But I get what you're saying there is it doesn't have all the context on everything that's going on.

Alexander Embiricos (00:13:31):
Yeah. And that's not only true when it's performing a task, but again, if you think of the best team and teammates, you don't tell them what to do. Maybe when you first hire them, you have a couple meetings and you're like, "Hey," you learn, "Okay, these prompts work for this teammate, these prompts don't. This is how to communicate with this person." Then eventually you give them some starter tasks, you delegate a few tasks. But then eventually you just say like, "Hey, great. Okay, you're working with this set of people in this area of the code base. Feel free to work with other people on other parts of the code base too, even. And yeah, you tell me what you think makes sense to be done." And so we think of this as proactivity and one of our major goals with Codex is to get to proactivity.

(00:14:09):
I think this is critically important to achieve the mission of OpenAI, which is to deliver the benefits of AGI to all humanity. I like to joke today that AI products, and it's a half joke, they're actually really hard to use because you have to be very thoughtful about when it could help you. And if you're not prompting a model to help you, it's probably not helping you at that time. And if you think of how many times the average user is prompting AI today, it's probably tens of times. But if you think of how many times people could actually get benefit from a really intelligent entity, it's thousands of times per day. And so a large part of our goal with Codex is to figure out what is the shape of an actual teammate agent that is helpful by default.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:54):
When people think about Cursor and even Cloud Code, it's like a IDE that helps you code and auto completes code and maybe does some agentic work. What I'm hearing here is the vision is different, which is it's a teammate. It's like a remote teammate, a building code for you that you talk to and ask to do things. And that also does IDE, auto complete and things like that. Is that a kind of a differentiator in the way you think about Codex?

Alexander Embiricos (00:15:18):
It's basically this idea that if you're a developer and you're trying to get something done, we want you to just feel like you have superpowers and you're able to move much, much faster. But we don't think that in order for you to reap those benefits, you need to be sitting there constantly thinking about, "How can I invoke AI at this point to do this thing?" We want you to be able to plug it in to the way that you work and have it just start to do stuff without you having to think about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:44):
Okay. I have a lot of questions along those lines, but just how's it going? Is there any stats, any numbers you can share about how Codex is doing?

Alexander Embiricos (00:15:49):
Yeah, Codex has been growing absolutely explosively since the launch of GPT-5 back in August. There's definitely some interesting product insights to talk about as to how we unlock that growth, if you're interested. But again, the last stat we shared there was we were well over 10x since August. In fact, it's been 20x since then. Also, the Codex models are serving many trillions of tokens a week now, and it's basically our most served coding model. One of the really cool things that we've seen is that the way that we decided to set up the Codex team was to build a really tightly integrated product and research team that are iterating on the model and the harness together. And it turns out that lets you just do a lot more and try many more experiments as to how these things will work together.

(00:16:35):
And so we were just training these models for use in our first party harness that we were very opinionated about. And then what we've started to see more recently actually is that other major API coding customers are now starting to adopt these models as well. And so we've reached a point where actually the Codex model is the most served coding model in the API as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:55):
You hinted at this, what unlocked this growth, I'm extremely interested in hearing that. It felt like before, I don't know, maybe this was before you joined the team, it just felt like Cloud Code was killing it. Just everyone was sitting on top of Cloud Code. It was by far the best way to code. And then all of a sudden Codex comes around. I remember Karpathy tweeted that he just has never seen a model like this. I think the tweet was the gnarliest bugs that he runs into that he just spends hours trying to figure out nothing else has solved, he gives it to Codex, lets it run for an hour and it solves it. What'd you guys do?

Alexander Embiricos (00:17:30):
We have this strong sort of mission here at OpenAI basically to build AGI. And so we think a lot about how can we shape the product so that it can scale. Earlier I was mentioning like, "Hey, if you're an engineer, you should be getting help from AI thousands of times per day," and so we thought a lot about the primitives for that when we launched our first version of Codex, which was Codex Cloud. And that was basically a product that had its own computer, lived in the cloud, you could delegate to it. And the coolest part about that is you could run many, many tasks in parallel. But some of the challenges that we saw are that it's a little bit harder to set that up, both in terms of environment configuration, like giving the model the tools it needs to validate its changes and to learn how to prompt in that way.

(00:18:20):
My analogy for this is, going back to this teammate analogy, it's like if you hired a teammate, but you're never allowed to get on a call with them and you can only go back and forth asynchronously over time. That works for some teammates and eventually that's actually how you want to spend most of your time. So that's still the future, but it's hard to initially adopt. And so we still have that vision of like, that's what we're trying to get you to, a teammate that you delegate to and then is proactive, and we're seeing that growing. But the key unlock is actually first you need to land with users in a way that's much more intuitive and trivial to get value from.

(00:18:54):
So the way that most people discover, the vast majority of users discover Codex today is either they download an IDE extension or they run it in their CLI and the agent works there with you on your computer interactively. And it works within a sandbox, which is actually a really cool piece of tech to help that be safe and secure, but it has access to all those dependencies. So if the agent needs to do something, it needs to run a command, it can do so within the sandbox. We don't have to set up any environment. And if it's a command that doesn't work in the sandbox, it can just ask you. And so you can get into this really strong feedback loop using the model. And then over time, our team's job is to help turn that feedback loop into you as a byproduct of using the product, configuring it so that you can then be delegating to it down the line.

(00:19:38):
And again, analogy, keep coming back to it, but if you hire a teammate and you ask them to do work, but you just give them a fresh computer from the store, it's going to be hard for them to do their job. But if as you work with them side by side, you could be like, "Oh, you don't have a password for this service we use, here's the password for this service. Yeah, don't worry, feel free to run this command," then it's much easier for them to then go off and do work for hours without you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:01):
So what I'm hearing is the initial version of Codex was almost too far in the future. It's like a remote in the cloud agent that's coding for you asynchronously. And what you did is, "Okay, let's actually come back a little bit, let's integrate into the way engineers already integrate into IDs and locally and help them on ramp to this new world,"

Alexander Embiricos (00:20:21):
Totally. And it was quite interesting because we dogfood product a ton at OpenAI. So dogfood as in we use our own product. And so Codex has been accelerating OpenAI over the course of the entire year, and the cloud product was a massive accelerant to the company as well. It just turns out that this was one of those places where the signal we got from dogfooding is a little bit different from the signal you get from the general market because at OpenAI, we train reasoning models all day and so we're very used to this kind of prompting and think upfront, run things massively in parallel and it would take some time and then come back to it later asynchronously. And so now when we build, we still get a ton of signal from dogfooding internally, but we're also very cognizant of the different ways that different audiences use the product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:12):
That's really funny. It's like live in the future, but maybe not too far in the future. And I could see how everyone at OpenAI is living very far in the future, and sometimes that won't work for everyone.

Alexander Embiricos (00:21:23):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:23):
What about just intelligence training data? I don't know, is there something else that helped Codex accelerate its ability to actually code? Is it better, cleaner data? Is it more just models advancing? Is there anything else that really helped accelerate?

Alexander Embiricos (00:21:38):
Yeah, so there's a few components here. I guess you were mentioning models and the models have improved a ton. In fact, just last Wednesday, we shipped GPT-5.1-Codex-Max, a very accurately named model, that is awesome. It is awesome both because it is for any given task that you were using GPT-5.1-Codex for, it's roughly 30% faster at accomplishing that task. But also it unlocks a ton of intelligence. So if you use it at our higher reasoning levels, it's just even smarter. And that tweet you were saying Karpathy made about, "Hey, give this your gnarliest bugs," obviously there's a ton going on in the market right now, but Codex-Max is definitely carrying that mantle of us tackling the hardest bugs. So that is super cool.

(00:22:28):
But I will say it's like some of how we're thinking about this is evolving a little bit from being like, "Yeah, we're just going to think about the model and let's just train the best model," to really thinking about what is an agent actually overall? And I'm not going to try to define agent exactly, but at least the stack that we think of it as having is it's like you have this model, really smart reasoning model that knows how to do a specific kind of task really well, so we can talk about how we make that possible. But then actually we need to serve that model through an API into a harness, and both of those things also have a really big role here.

(00:23:02):
So for instance, one of the things that we're really proud of is you can have GPT-5.1-Codex-Max work for really long periods of time. That's not normal, but you can set it up to do that or that might happen. But now routinely we'll hear about people saying, "Yeah, it ran overnight or it ran for 24 hours." And so for a model to work continuously for that amount of time, it's going to exceed its context window. And so we have a solution for that, which we call compaction.

(00:23:28):
But compaction is actually a feature that uses all three layers of that stack. So you need to have a model that has a concept of compaction and knows like, "Okay, as I start to approach this context window, I might be asked to prepare to be run in a new context window." And then at the API layer, you need an API that understands this concept and has an endpoint that you can hit to do this change. And at the harness layer, you need a harness that can prepare the payload for this to be done. So shipping this compaction feature that now just made this behavior possible to anyone using Codex actually meant working across all three things. And I think that's increasingly going to be true.

(00:24:02):
Another maybe underappreciated version of this is if you think about all the different coding products out there, they all have very different tool harnesses with very different opinions on how the model should work. So if you want to train a model to be good at all the different ways it could work, maybe you have a strong opinion that it should work using semantic search. Maybe you have a strong opinion that it should call bespoke tools or maybe you have, in our case, a strong opinion that it should just use the shell and work in the terminal, you can move much faster if you're just optimizing for one of those worlds. So the way that we built Codex is that it just uses the shell, but in order to make that safer and secure, we have a sandbox that the model is used to operating in.

(00:24:45):
So I think one of the biggest accelerants, to go all the way back to answer to your question, is just we're building all three things in parallel and tuning each one and constantly experimenting with how those things work with a tightly integrated product and research team.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:59):
Do you think you win in this space? Do you think it'll always be this kind of race with other models constantly leapfrogging each other? Do you think there's a world where someone just runs away with it and no one else can ever catch up? Is there a path to just, "We win"?

Alexander Embiricos (00:25:15):
Again, comes back to this idea of building a teammate, and not just a teammate that participates in team planning and prioritization, not just a teammate that really tests its code and helps you maintain and deploy it. But even a teammate... If you think, again, an engineering teammate, they can also schedule a calendar invite or move standup or do whatever, right? And so in my mind, if we just imagine that every day or every week some crazy new capability is just going to be deployed by a research lab, it's just impossible for us as humans to keep up and use all this technology. So I think we need to get to this world where you kind of just have an AI teammate or super assistant that you just talk to and it just knows how to be helpful on its own. So you don't have to be reading the latest tips for how to use it, you've plugged it in and it just provides help.

(00:26:10):
So that's kind of the shape of what I think we're building. And I think that will be a very sticky winning product if we can do so. So the shape that in my head, at least I have, is that we build... Maybe a fun topic is like, "Is Chat the right interface for AI?" I actually think Chat is a very good interface when you don't know what you're supposed to use it for. In the same way that if I think of I'm on MS Teams or in Slack with a teammate, Chat is pretty good. I can ask for whatever I want. It's kind of the common denominator for everything. So you can chat with a super assistant about whatever topic you want, whether it be coding or not. And then if you are a functional expert in a specific domain such as coding, there's a GUI that you can pull up to go really deep and look at the code and work with the code.

(00:26:54):
So I think what we need to build as OpenAI is basically this idea of you have Chat, ChatGPT and not as a tool that's ubiquitously available to everyone, you start using it even outside of work to just help you. You become very comfortable with the idea of being accelerated with AI. So then you get to work and you just can naturally just, "Yeah, I'm just going to ask it for this and I don't need to know about all the connectors or all the different features. I'm just going to ask it for help and it'll surface to me the best way that it can help at this point in time and maybe even chime in when I didn't ask it for help." So in my mind, if we can get to that, I think that's how we really build the winning product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:32):
This is so interesting because with my chat with Nick Turley, the head of ChatGPT, I think he shared that the original name for ChatGPT was Super Assistant or something like that. And it's interesting that there's that approach to the super assistant and then there's this Codex approach. It's almost like the B2C version and the B2B version. And what I'm hearing is the idea here is, okay, you start with coding and building and then it's doing all this other stuff for you, scheduling meetings, I don't know, probably posting in Slack, I don't know, shipping designs. I don't know, is the idea that this is the business version of ChatGPT in a sense, or is there something else there?

Alexander Embiricos (00:28:08):
Yeah. So we're getting to the one-year time horizon conversation. A lot of this might happen sooner, but in terms of fuzziness, I think we're at the one year. So I'll give you a contention and a plausible way we get there, but as for how it happens, who knows? So basically, if we're going to build a super assistant, it has to be able to do things. So we're going to have a model and it's going to be able to do stuff affecting your world. And one of the learnings I think we've seen over the past year or so is that for models to do stuff, they're much more effective when they can use a computer.

(00:28:41):
Right, okay, so now we're like, okay, we need the super assistant that can use a computer, or many computers. And now the question is, okay, well, how should it use the computer? And there's lots of ways to use a computer. You could try to hack the OS and use accessibility APIs, maybe a bit easier as you could point and click. That's a little slow and unpredictable sometimes. And another way, it turns out the best way for models to use computers is simply to write code. So we're kind of getting to this idea where, well, if you want to build any agent, maybe you should be building a coding agent and maybe to the user, a non-technical user, they won't even know they're using a coding agent, the same way that no one thinks about are they using the internet or not, which is they're more just like, "Is WiFi on?"

(00:29:23):
So I think that what we're doing with Codex is we're building a software engineering teammate, and as part of that, we're kind of building an agent that can use a computer by writing code. And so we're already seeing some pull for this. It's quite early, but we're starting to see people who are using Codex for coding adjacent product purposes. And so as that develops, I think we'll just naturally see that, oh, it turns out we should just always have the agent write code if there is a coding way to solve a problem instead of... Even if you're doing a financial analysis, maybe write some code for that.

(00:29:55):
So basically like you were like, "Hey, is this the two ends of this product for the super assistant of ChatGPT?" In my mind, just coding is a core competency of any agent including ChatGPT. And so really what we think we're building is that competency. So here's the really cool thing about agents writing code is that you can import code. Code is composable, interoperable. Because one very reductive view we could have for an agent is it's just going to be given a computer and it's just going to point and click and go around. But that is the future. And then how we get there is difficult to chart a path because a lot of the questions around building agents aren't like, "Can the agent do it?" But it's more about, "Well, how can we help the agent understand the context that it's working in?" And the team that's using it probably has a way that they like to do things. They have guidelines. They probably want certain deterministic guarantees about what the agent can or cannot do. Or they want to know that the agent understands this detail.

(00:30:57):
An example would be if we're looking at a crash reporting tool, hitting a connector for it, every sub-team probably has a different meta prompt for how they want the crashes to be analyzed. And so we start to get to this thing where, yeah, we have this agent sitting in front of a computer, but we need to make that configurable for the team or for the user and let them... Stuff that the agent does often, we probably just want to build in as a competency that this agent has that it can do.

(00:31:24):
So I think we end up with this generalizable thing, that you were saying, of an agent that can just write its own scripts for whatever it wants to do. But I think that the really key part here is can we make it so that everything that the agent has to do often or that it does well, we can just remember and store so that the agent doesn't have to write a script for that again? Or maybe if I just joined a team and you are already on the same team as me, I can just use all those scripts that the agents had written already.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:53):
Yeah, it's like if this is our teammate, they can share things that it's learned from working with other people at the company. It just makes sense as a metaphor.

Alexander Embiricos (00:32:01):
Right. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:02):
It feels like you're in the Karpathy camp of, "Agents today are not that great and mostly slop and maybe in the future they'll be awesome." Does that resonate?

Alexander Embiricos (00:32:11):
So I think coding agents are pretty great. I think we're seeing a ton of value there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:11):
Yeah, that feels right. That feels right, yeah.

Alexander Embiricos (00:32:17):
And then I think agents outside of coding, it's still very early. And this is just my opinion, but I think they're going to get a whole lot better once they can use coding too in a composable way. It's kind of the fun part of when you're building for software engineers, at my startup, we were building for software engineers too for a lot of that journey, and they're just such a fun audience to build for because they also like building for themselves and are often even more creative than we are in thinking about how to use the technology. So by building for software engineers, you get to just observe a ton of emergent behaviors and things that you should do and build into the product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:54):
I love how you say that because a lot of people building for engineers get really annoyed because the engineers they're just always complaining about stuff. They're like, "Ah, that sucks. Why'd you build it this way?" I love that you enjoy it, but I think it's probably because you're building such an amazing tool for engineers that can actually solve problems and just code for them.

(00:33:12):
Kind of along those lines, there's always this talk of what will happen with jobs, engineers, coding, do you have to learn coding? All these things. Clearly the way you're describing it is it's a teammate, it's going to work with you, make you more superhuman, it's not going to replace you. What's the way you just think about the impact on the field of engineering, having this super intelligent engineering teammate?

Alexander Embiricos (00:33:33):
I think there's two sides to it, but the one we were just talking about is this idea that maybe every agent should actually use code and be a coding agent. And in my mind, that's just a small part of this broader idea that, hey, as we make code even more ubiquitous... I mean, you could probably claim it's ubiquitous today, even pre AI, right? But as we make code even more ubiquitous, it's actually just going to be used for many more purposes. And so there's just going to be a ton more need for humans with this competency.

(00:34:01):
So that's my view. I think this is quite a complex topic. So it's something we talk about a lot and we have to see how it pans out. But I think what we can do basically as a product team building in the space is just try to always think about how are we building a tool so that it feels like we're maximally accelerating people rather than building a tool that makes it more unclear what you should do as the human?

(00:34:27):
I think, to give an example right now, nowadays when you work with a coding agent, it writes a ton of code, but it turns out writing code is actually one of the most fun parts of software engineering for many software engineers. So then you end up reviewing AI code. And that's often a less fun part of the job for many software engineers. So I actually think we see that this plays out all the time in a ton of micro decisions. So we as a product team, we're always thinking about, "Okay, how do we make this more fun? How do we make you feel more empowered? Where is this not working?" And I would argue that reviewing agent written code is a place that today is less fun.

(00:35:04):
So then I think, "Okay, what can we do about that?" Well, we can ship a code review feature that helps you build confidence in the AI written code. Okay, cool. Another thing we could do is we can make it so that the agent's better able to validate its work. And it gets all the way down into micro decisions. If you're going to have an agent capability to validate work, and let's say you have... I'm thinking of Codex Web right now, you have a pain that sort of reflects the work the agent did, what do you see first? Do you see the diff or do you see the image preview of the code it wrote? And I think if you're thinking about this from perspective, "How do I empower the human? How do I make them feel as accelerated as possible?" You obviously see the image first. You shouldn't be reviewing the code unless first you've seen the image, unless maybe it's been reviewed by an AI and now it's time for you to take a look.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:49):
When I had Michael Truell, the CEO of Cursor on the podcast, he had this kind of vision of us moving to something beyond code. And I've seen this rise of something called spec-driven development where you just write the spec and then the AI writes code for you. So you start working at this higher abstraction level. Is that something you see where we're going, just like engineers not having to actually write code or look at code and there's going to be this higher level of abstraction that we focus on?

Alexander Embiricos (00:36:16):
Yeah. I mean, I think there's constantly these levels of abstraction and they're actually already played out today. Today, coding agents, mostly it's prompt to patch. We're starting to see people doing spec-driven development or planned and driven development. That's actually one of the ways when people ask, "Hey, how do you run Codex on a really long task?" Well, it's like often collaborate with it first to write a plan.md, like a markdown file that's your plan. And once you're happy with that, then you ask it to go off and do work. And if that plan has verifiable steps, it'll work for much longer. So we're totally seeing that.

(00:36:50):
I think spec-driven development is an interesting idea. It's not clear to me that it'll work out that way because a lot of people don't like writing specs either, but it seems plausible that some people will work that way. A bit of a joke idea though is if you think of the way that many teams work today, they often don't necessarily have specs, but the team is just really self-driven and so stuff just gets done. And so almost that it's like, I'm coming up with this on the spot, so it's not a good name, but chatter-driven development where it's just like stuff is happening on social media and in your team communications tools. And then as a result, code gets written and deployed.

(00:37:29):
So yeah, I think I'm a little bit more oriented in that way of I don't even necessarily want to have to write a spec. Sometimes I want to, only if I like writing specs. Other times I might just want to say like, "Hey, here's the customer service channel and tell me what's interesting to know, but if it's a small bug, just fix it." I don't want to have to write a spec for that, right?

(00:37:51):
I have this sort of hypothetical future that I like to share sometimes with people as a provocation, which is in a world where we have truly amazing agents, what does it look like to be a solopreneur? And one terrible idea for how it could look is that actually there's a mobile app and every idea that the agent has to do is just vertical video on your phone and then you can swipe left if you think it's a bad idea and you can swipe right if it's a good idea. And you can press and hold and speak to your phone if you want to give feedback on the idea before you swipe. And in this world, basically what your job is is just to plug in this app into every single signal system or system of record, and then you just sit back and swipe. I don't know.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:39):
I love this. So this is like Tinder meets TikTok meets Codex.

Alexander Embiricos (00:38:42):
It's pretty terrible.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:43):
No, this is great. So the idea here is this agent is watching and listening to you, paying attention to the market, your users, and it's like, "Cool, here's something I should do." It's like a proactive engineer just like, "Here, we should build this feature, fix this thing."

Alexander Embiricos (00:38:56):
Exactly. Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:58):
I think it's a really good idea.

Alexander Embiricos (00:39:00):
Communicating with you in the lowest effort way for your consumers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:02):
Yeah, yeah, the modern way we communicate, swipe left to right and vertical feed. And then the Sora video, okay, so I see how this all connects now. I see.

Alexander Embiricos (00:39:11):
Yeah. To be clear, we're not building that, but it's a fun idea. I mean, in this example though, one of the things that it's doing is it's consuming external signals, right? I think the other really interesting thing is if we think about what is the most successful AI product to date, I would argue, it's funny actually not to confuse things at all, but the first time we used the brand Codex at OpenAI was actually the model powering GitHub Copilot. This is way back in the day, years ago. And so we decided to reuse that brand recently because it's just so good, Codex, code execution.

(00:39:46):
But I think actually auto completion and IDEs is one of the most successful AI products today. And part of what's so magical about it is that when it can surface ideas for helping you really rapidly, when it's right, you're accelerated. When it's wrong, it's not that annoying. It can be annoying, but it's not that annoying. So you can create this mixed initiative system that's contextually responding to what you're attempting to do.So in my mind, this is a really interesting thing for us as OpenAI as we're building.

(00:40:22):
So for instance, when I think about launching a browser, which we did with Atlas, in my mind, one of the really interesting things we can then do is we can then contextually surface ways that we can help you as you're going about your day. And so we break out of this, we're just looking at code or we're just in your terminal into this idea that, "Hey, a real teammate is dealing with a lot more than just code. They're dealing with a lot of things that are web content. So how can we help you with that?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:51):
Man, there's so much there. I love this. Okay, so auto complete on web with the browser. That's so interesting. Just like, "Here's all the things that we can help you with as you're browsing and going about your day."

(00:41:01):
I want to talk about Atlas. I'll come back to that. Codex, code execution, did not know that. That's really clever. I get it now. Okay, and then this chatter, what is a chatter-driven development? No, this is a really good idea, but it reminds me, I had Dhanji on the podcast, CTO of Block, and they have this product called Goose, which is their own internal agent thing. And he talked about an engineer at Block just has Goose watch him with his screen and listens to every meeting and proactively does work that he should probably want to do. So ships to PR, sends an email, drafts a Slack message. So he's doing exactly what you're describing in kind of a very early way.

Alexander Embiricos (00:41:45):
Yeah, that's super interesting. And I bet you, so if we went and asked them what the bottleneck to that productivity is, did they share what it is?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:54):
Probably looking at it and just making sure this is the right thing to do, yeah.

Alexander Embiricos (00:41:58):
Yeah. So we see this now. We have a Slack integration for Codex. People love if there's something that you need to do quickly, people will just @ mention Codex, "Why do you think this bug is happening?" It doesn't have to be an engineer. Even maybe data scientists often here are using Codex a ton to just answer questions like, "Why do you think this metric moved? What happened?" So questions, you get the answer right back in Slack. It's amazing, super useful. But as for when it's writing code, then you have to go back and look at the code.

(00:42:25):
So the real, I think, bottleneck right now is validating that the code worked and writing code review. So in my mind, if we wanted to get to something like the friend you were talking about's world, I think we really need to figure out how to get people to configure their coding agents to be much more autonomous on those later stages of the work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:46):
It makes sense. Like you said, writing code, I used to be an engineer, I was an engineer for 10 years, really fun to write code, really fun to just get in the flow, build architect, test. Not so fun to look at everyone else's code and just have to go through and be on the hook if it's doing something dumb that's going to take down production. And now that building has become easier, what I've always heard from companies that are really at the cutting edge of this is the bottleneck is now figuring out what to build. And then it's at the end of like, "Okay, we have all this, all 100 PRs to review. Who's going to go through all that?"

Alexander Embiricos (00:43:14):
Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:15):
Yeah.

(00:43:17):
This episode is brought to you by Jira Product Discovery. The hardest part of building products isn't actually building products. It's everything else. It's proving that the work matters, managing stakeholders, trying to plan ahead. Most teams spend more time reacting than learning, chasing updates, justifying roadmaps, and constantly unblocking work to keep things moving. Jira Product Discovery puts you back in control. With Jira Product Discovery, you can capture insights and prioritize high impact ideas. It's flexible so it adapts to the way your team works and helps you build a roadmap that drives alignment, not questions. And because it's built on Jira, you can track ideas from strategy to delivery all in one place. Less chasing, more time to think, learn, and build the right thing. Get Jira Product Discovery for free at atlassian.com/lenny. That's atlassian.com/lenny.

(00:44:08):
What has the impact of Codex been on the way you operate as a product person as a PM? It's clear how engineering is impacted, code is written for you. What has it done to the way you operate and the way PMs operate at OpenAI?

Alexander Embiricos (00:44:24):
Yeah, I mean, I think mostly I just feel much more empowered. I've always been sort of more technical leaning PM, and especially when I'm working on products for engineers, I feel like it's necessary to dogfood the product. But even beyond that, I just feel like I can do much, much more as a PM. And Scott Belsky talks about this idea of compressing the talent stack. I'm not sure if I've phrased that right. But it's basically this idea that maybe the boundaries between these roles are a little bit less needed than before because people can just do much more. And every time someone can do more, you can skip one communication boundary and make the team that much more efficient.

(00:45:03):
So I think we see it in a bunch of functions now, but I guess since you asked about products specifically, now answering questions much, much easier. You can just ask Codex for thoughts on that. A lot of PM type work, understanding what's changing. Again, just ask Codex for help with that. Prototyping is often faster than writing specs. This is something that a lot of people have talked about.

(00:45:29):
I think something that, I don't think it's super surprising, but something that's slightly surprising is we see... We're mostly building Codex to write code that's going to be deployed to production, but actually we see a lot of throwaway code written with Codex now. It's kind of going back to this idea of ubiquitous code. So you'll see someone wants to do an analysis. If I want to understand something, it's like, okay, just give Codex a bunch of data, but then ask it to build an interactive data viewer for this data. That's just too annoying to do in the past, but now it's just totally worth the time of just getting an agent to go do something.

(00:46:02):
Similarly, I've seen some pretty cool prototypes on our design team about if you want to... Well, a designer basically wanted to build an animation, and this is the Coin Animation Codex, and it was like normally it'd be too annoying to program this animation. So they just vibe coded a animation editor and then they use the animation editor to build the animation, which they then check into their repo.

(00:46:24):
Actually, our designers, there's a ton of acceleration there. And speaking of compressing the talent stack, I think our designers are very PME. So they do a ton of product work and they actually have an entire vibe coded side prototype of the Codex app. And so a lot of how we talk about things is we'll have a really quick jam because there's 10,000 things going on, and then the designer will go think about how this should work. But instead of talking about it again, they'll just vibe code a prototype of that in their standalone prototype. We'll play with it. If we like it, they'll vibe engineer that prototype into an actual PR to land. And then depending on their comfort with the code base, like Codex utilizing Rust is a little harder, maybe they'll land it themselves or they'll get close and then an engineer can help them land the PR.

(00:47:11):
We recently shipped the Sora Android app, and that was one of the most mind-blowing examples of acceleration, actually, because usage of Codex internally at OpenAI is obviously really, really high, but it's been growing over the course of the year, both in terms of now it's basically all technical staff use it, but even the intensity and know how of how to make the most of coding agents has gone up by a ton. And so the Sora Android app, a fully new app, we built it in 18 days. It went from zero to launch to employees, and then 10 days later, so 28 days total, we went to just GA, to the public, and that was done just with the help of Codex. So pretty insane velocity.

(00:47:55):
I would say it was a little bit... I don't want to say easy mode, but there is one thing that Codex is really good at if you're a company that's building software on multiple platforms, so you've already figured out some of the underlying APIs or systems, asking Codex to port things over is really effective because it has something you can go look at. And so the engineers on that team were basically having Codex go look at the iOS app, produce plans of work that needed to be done, and then go implement those. And it was looking at iOS and Android at the same time. And so basically it was two weeks to launch to employees, four weeks total. Insanely fast.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:31):
What makes that even more insane is it became the number one app in the app store. This just boggles the mind. Okay, so 28 days?

Alexander Embiricos (00:48:39):
Yeah, so imagine number one app in the app store with a handful of engineers. I think it was two or three possibly in a handful of weeks.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:51):
Yeah, this is absurd. Wow.

Alexander Embiricos (00:48:56):
Yeah, so that's a really fun example of acceleration. And then Atlas was the other one that I think Ben did a podcast, the engine lead on Atlas, sharing a little bit about how we built there. Atlas is actually... I mean, it's a browser, and building a browser is really hard. So we had to build a lot of difficult systems in order to do that. And basically we got to the point where that team has a ton of power users of Codex right now, and it got to the point they where basically... We were talking to them about it, because a lot of those engineers are people I used to work with before at my startup. And so they'd say, "Before this would've taken us two to three weeks for two to three engineers, and now it's like one engineer, one week." So massive acceleration there as well.

(00:49:49):
And what's quite cool is that we shipped Atlas on Mac first, but now we're working on the Windows version. So the team now is ramping up on Windows and they're helping us make Codex better on Windows too, which is admittedly earlier, just the model we shipped last week is the first model that natively understands PowerShell. So PowerShell being the native Shell language on Windows. So yeah, it's been really awesome to see the whole company getting accelerated by Codex from... And most obviously, also research and improving how quickly we train models and how well we do it. And then even design, as we talked about, and marketing. Actually, we're at this point now where my product marketer is often also making string changes just directly from Slack or updating docs directly from Slack.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:37):
These are amazing examples. You guys are living at the bleeding edge of what is possible, and this is how other companies are going to work. Just shipping, again, what became the number one app in the app store and just beloved all over the... It just took over, I don't know, the world for at least a week. Built, you said, in 28 days and I don't know, 10 days, 18 days just to get the core of it working.

Alexander Embiricos (00:51:00):
Yeah, so it was like 18 days we had a thing that employees were playing with, and then 10 days later we were out.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:05):
And you said just a couple engineers.

Alexander Embiricos (00:51:07):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:07):
Two or three. Okay. And then Atlas you said took a week to build?

Alexander Embiricos (00:51:12):
No, no, no. So Atlas, not the whole week, but Atlas was a really meaty project. And so I was talking to one of the engineers on Atlas about just what they use Codex for. And it's basically like, "We use Codex for absolutely everything." And I was like, "Okay, well, how would you measure the acceleration?" And so basically the answer I got back was, "Previously would've taken two to three weeks for two to three engineers, and now it's like one engineer, one week."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:36):
Do you think this eventually moves to non-engineers doing this sort of thing? Does it have to be an engineer building this thing? Could Sora have been built by, I don't know, a PM or designer?

Alexander Embiricos (00:51:45):
I think we will very much get to the point, well, basically where the boundaries are a little bit blurred. I think you're going to want someone who understands the details of what they're building, but what details those are will evolve. Kind of like how now if you're writing Swift, you don't have to speak assembly. There's a handful of people in the world, and it's really important that they exist and speak assembly, maybe more than a handful, but that's a specialized function that most companies don't need to have.

(00:52:14):
So I think we're just going to naturally see an increase in layers of abstraction. And then the cool thing is now we're entering the language layer of abstraction, like natural language, and then natural language itself is really flexible. You could have engineers talking about a plan and then you could have engineers talking about a spec, and then you could have engineers talking about just a product or an idea. So I think we can also start moving up those layers of abstraction as well.

(00:52:39):
But I do think this is going to be gradual. I don't think it's going to go off to all of a sudden nobody ever writes anything, any code and it's just specs. I think it's going to be much more like, "Okay, we've set up our coding agent to be really good at previewing the build or at running tests," maybe that's the first part that most people have set up. And it's like, "Okay, now we've set it up so they can execute the build and it can see the results of its own changes, but we haven't yet built a good integration harness so that it can," in the case of Atlas... By the way, I don't know if they've done any of this or not. I think they've done a lot of this. But maybe the next stage is enable it to load a few sample pages to see how well those work. So then, okay, now we're going to set it up to do that.

(00:53:18):
And I think for some time at least, we're going to have humans curating which of these connectors or systems or components that the agent needs to be good at talking to. And then in the future, there will be an even greater unlock where Codex tells you how to set it up or maybe sets itself up in a repo.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:34):
What a wild time to be alive. Wow. I'm curious just the second order effects of this sort of thing, just how quickly it is to build stuff. What does that do? Does that mean distribution becomes much, much more important? Does it mean ideas are just worth a lot more? It's interesting to think about how quick how that changes.

Alexander Embiricos (00:53:51):
I'm curious what you think. I still don't think ideas are worth as much as maybe a lot of people think. I still think execution is really hard. You can build something fast, but you still need to execute well on it, still needs to make sense and be a coherent thing overall, yeah, and distribution is massive.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:08):
Yeah. Just feels like everything else is now more important. Everything that isn't the building piece, which is coming up with an idea, getting to market, profit, all that kind of stuff.

Alexander Embiricos (00:54:18):
Yeah. I think we might've been in this weird temporary phase where, for a while, it was so hard to build product that you mostly just had to be really good at building product and it maybe didn't matter if you had an intimate understanding of a specific customer. But now I think we're getting to this point where actually if I could only choose one thing to understand, it would be really meaningful understanding of the problems that a certain customer has. If I could only go in with one core competency.

(00:54:52):
So I think that's ultimately still what's going to matter most. If you're starting a new company today and you have a really good understanding and network of customers that are currently underserved by AI tools, I think you're set. Whereas if you're good at building websites, but you don't have any specific customer to build for, I think you're in for a much harder time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:14):
Bullish on vertical AI startups is what I'm hearing. Yeah, I completely agree. There's the general thing that can solve a lot of problems and then there's like, "We're going to solve presentations incredibly well and we're going to understand the presentation problem better than anyone and we're going to plug into your workflows and all these other things that matter for a very specific problem." Okay, incredible.

(00:55:36):
When you think about progress on Codex, I imagine you have a bunch of evals and there's all these public benchmarks. What's something you look at to tell you, "Okay, we're making really good progress," I imagine it's not going to be the one thing, but what do you focus on? What's something you're trying to push? What's a KPI or two?

Alexander Embiricos (00:55:51):
One of the things that I'm constantly reminding myself of is that a tool like Codex naturally is a tool that you would become a power user of. So we can accidentally spend a lot of our time thinking about features that are very deep in the user adoption journey. And so we can kind of end up oversolving for that. And so I think it's just critically important to go look at your D7 retention. Just go try the product, sign up from scratch again. I have a few too many ChatGPT Pro accounts that I've, in order to maximally correctly dogfood, signed up for on my Gmail and they charge me 200 bucks a month. I need to expense those. But I think just the feeling of being end user and the early retention stats are still super important for us because as much as this category is taking off, I think we're still in the very early days of people using them.

(00:56:44):
Another thing that we do that I think we might be the most user feedback/social media pilled team out there in this space is like a few of us are constantly on Reddit and Twitter, and there's praise up there and there's a lot of complaints, but we take the complaints very seriously and look at them. And I think that, again, because you can use a coding agent for so many different things, it often is kind of broken in many sort of ways for specific behaviors. So we actually monitor a lot just what the vibes are on social media pretty often, especially I think for Twitter/X, it's a little bit more hypey and then Reddit is a little more negative but real actually. So I've started increasingly paying attention to how people are talking about using Codex on Reddit actually.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:39):
This is important for people to know. Which of the subreddits do you check most? Is there like an r/Codex or?

Alexander Embiricos (00:57:44):
I mean, the algorithm's pretty good at surfacing stuff, but r/Codex is there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:48):
Okay. I'll take. Very interesting. And then if people tag you on Twitter, you still see that, but maybe not as powerful as seeing it on Reddit.

Alexander Embiricos (00:57:56):
Well, yeah. Well, the thing with Twitter is it's a little bit more one-to-one, even if it's in public. Whereas with Reddit, those are really good upvoting mechanics and maybe most people are still not bots, unclear. So you get good signal on what matters and what other people think.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:09):
So interestingly, Atlas, I want to talk about that briefly. You guys launched Atlas. I tweeted actually that I tried Atlas and then I don't love the AI only search experience. I was just like, "I just want Google sometimes," or whatever. Just waiting for AI to give me an answer, I'm like, "I don't want to... " And there was no way to switch. I just tweeted, "Hey, I'm switching back. It's not great." And I feel like I made some PMs at OpenAI sad. And I saw someone tweet, "Okay, we have Atlas now," which I imagine was always part of the plan. It's probably an example of just, "We got to ship stuff, see how people use it and then we figure it out." So I guess one is that, I don't know, is there anything there? And two, I'm just curious, why are you guys building a web browser?

Alexander Embiricos (00:58:48):
So I worked on Atlas for a bit. I don't work on it now. But a bit of the narrative here for me just to tell my story a bit was I was working on this screen sharing, pair programming startup, and then we joined OpenAI. And so the idea was really to build a contextual desktop assistant. And the reason I believe that's so important is because I think that it's really annoying to have to give all your context to an assistant and then to figure out how it can help you. So if it could just understand what you are trying to do, then it could maximally accelerate you. So I still think of Codex actually as a contextual assistant from a little bit of a different angle, starting with coding tasks.

(00:59:30):
But some of the thinking, at least for me personally, I can't speak for the whole project, was that a lot of work is done in the web. And if we could build a browser, then we could be contextual for you, but in a much more first class way. We weren't hacking other desktop software which have very varied support for what content they're rendering to the accessibility tree. We wouldn't be relying on screenshots, which are a little bit slower and unreliable. Instead, we could be In the rendering engine and extract whatever we needed to help you. And also I like to think of video games, I don't know if you've played, I don't know, say Halo, you walk up to an object, I mean, this is true for many games, you press... Man, it's been a long time, this is embarrassing. Press X and it just does the right thing. And I was one of those guys who always read the instruction manual for every video game that I bought.

(01:00:24):
And I remember the first time I read about a contextual action and I just thought it was this really cool idea. And the thing about a contextual action is we need to know what you are attempting to do. We have a little bit of context and then we can help. And I think this is critically important because imagine this world that we reach where we have agents that are helping you thousands of times per day.

(01:00:49):
Imagine if the only way we could tell you that we helped you was if we could push notify you. So you get a thousand push notifications a day of an AI saying like, "Hey, I did this thing. Do you like it? " It'd be super annoying, right? Whereas imagine, going back to software engineering, I was looking at a dashboard and I noticed some key metric had gone down. And at that point in time, an AI could maybe go take a look and then surface the fact that it has an opinion on why this metric went down and maybe a fix right there right when I'm looking at the dashboard. That would much more keep me in flow and enable the agent to take action on many more things.

(01:01:26):
So in my mind, part of why I'm excited for us to have a browser is that I think we have then much more context around what we should help with. Users have much more control over what they want us to look at. It's like, "Hey, if you want us to take action on something, you can open it in your AI browser. If you don't, then you can open it in your other browser." So really clear control and boundaries. And then we have the ability to build UX that's mixed initiatives so that we can surface contextual actions to you at the time that they're helpful as opposed to just randomly notifying you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:58):
Hearing the vision for Codex being the super assistant, it's not just there to code for you. It's trying to do a lot for you as a teammate, as this kind of super teammate, and that makes you awesome at work. So I get this. Speaking of that, are there other non-engineering common use cases for Codex? Just ways that non-engineers... We talked about designers prototyping and building stuff, are there any fun or unexpected ways people are using Codex that aren't engineers?

Alexander Embiricos (01:02:24):
I mean, there's a load of unexpected ways, but I think most of where we're seeing real traction with people using things are still for now very, I would say, coding adjacent or tech-oriented, places where there's a mature ecosystem or maybe you're doing data analysis or something like that. I personally am expecting that we're going to see a lot more of that over time. But for now, we're keeping the team very focused on just coding for now because there's so much more work to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:54):
For people that are thinking about trying out Codex, does it work for all kinds of code bases? What code does it support? If you're like, I don't know, SAP, can you add Codex and start building things? What's the sweet spot? Where does it start to not be amazing yet?

Alexander Embiricos (01:03:11):
I'm really glad you asked this question actually because the best way to try Codex is to give it your hardest tasks, which is a little different than some of the other coding agents. Some tools you might think, "Okay, let me start easy or just vibe code something random and decide if I like the tool." Whereas we're really building Codex to be the professional tool that you can give your hardest problems to. And that writes high quality code in your enormous code base that is in fact not perfect right now. So yeah, I think if you're going to try Codex, you want to try it on a real task that you have and not necessarily dumb that task down to something that's trivial, but actually a good one would be you have a hard bug and you don't know what's causing that bug and you ask Codex to help figure that out or to implement that the fix.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:00):
I love that answer. Just give it to your hardest problem.

Alexander Embiricos (01:04:03):
I will say if you're like, "Hey, okay, well, the hardest problem I have is that I need to build a new unicorn business," obviously that's not going to work. Not yet. So I think it's like give it the hardest problem, but something that is still one question or one task to start. That's if you're testing and then over time you can learn how to use it for bigger things.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:25):
Yeah. What languages does it support?

Alexander Embiricos (01:04:27):
Basically, the way we've trained Codex is there's a distribution of languages that we support and it's fairly aligned with the frequency of these languages in the world. So unless you're writing some very esoteric language or some private language, it should do fine in your language.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:41):
If someone was just getting started, is there a tip you could share to help them be successful? If you could just whisper a little tip into someone just setting up Codex for the first time to help them have a really good time, what's something you would whisper?

Alexander Embiricos (01:04:54):
I might say try a few things in parallel. So you could try giving it a hard task, maybe ask it to understand the code base, formulate a plan with it around an idea that you have and kind of build your way up from there. And the meta idea here is, again, it's like you're building trust with a new teammate. And so you wouldn't go to a new teammate and just give them like, "Hey, do this thing. Here's zero context." You would start by first making sure they understand the code base and then you would maybe align on an approach and then you would have them go off and do bit by bit. And I think if you use Codex in that way, you'll just naturally start to understand the different ways of prompting it because it's a super powerful agent and model, but it is a little bit different to prompt Codex than other models.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:38):
Just a couple more questions. One, we touched on this a little bit, as AI does more and more coding, there's always this question of, "Should I learn to code and why should I spend time doing this sort of thing?" For people that are trying to figure out what to do with their career, especially if they're into software engineering computer science, do you think there's specific elements of computer science that are more and more important to lean into, maybe things they don't need to worry about? What do you think people should be leaning into skill-wise as this becomes more and more of a thing in our workplace?

Alexander Embiricos (01:06:11):
I think there's a couple angles you could go at this from. Well, the easiest one to think of at least is just be a doer of things. I think that with coding agents getting better and better over time, it's just what you can do as even someone in college or a new grad is just so much more than what that was before. And so I think you just want to be taking advantage of that. And definitely when I'm looking at hiring folks who are earlier career, it's definitely something that I think about is how productive are they using the latest tools? They should be super productive. And if you think of it in that way, they actually have less of a handicap than before versus a more senior career person because the divide is actually getting smaller because they've got these amazing coding agents now. So that's one thing, which is, I guess the advice is just learn about whatever you want, but just make sure you spend time doing things, not just fulfilling homework assignments, I guess.

(01:07:11):
I think the other side of it though is that it's still deeply worth understanding what makes a good overall software system. So I still think that skills, like really strong systems engineering skills, or even really effective communication and collaboration with your team, skills like that I think are important or are going to continue to matter for quite some time. I don't think it's going to be all of a sudden the AI coding agents are just able to build perfect systems without your help. I think it's going to look much more gradual where it's like, okay, we have these AI coding agents, they're able to validate their work. It's still important.

(01:07:51):
For example, I'm thinking of an engineer who was working on Atlas, since we were talking about it, he set up Codex so that it can verify its own work, which is a little bit non-trivial because of the nature of the Atlas project. So the way that he did that was he actually prompted Codex like, "Hey, why can't you verify your work? Fix it," and did that on a loop. And so you still, at various phases, are going to want a human in the loop to help configure the coding agent to be effective. So I think you still want to be able to reason about that. So maybe it's less important that you can type really fast and you understand exactly how to write... Not that anyone writes a 4H loop or something, or you don't need to know how to implement a specific algorithm. But I think you need to be able to reason about the different systems and what makes a software engineering team effective. So I think that's the other really important thing.

(01:08:40):
Then maybe the last angle that you could take is, I think if you're on the frontier of knowledge for a given thing, I still think that's deeply interesting to go down, partially because that knowledge is still going to be... Agents aren't going to be as good at that, but also partially because I think that by trying to advance the frontier of a specific thing, you'll actually end up being forced to take advantage of coding agents and using them to accelerate your own workflow as you go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:09):
What's an example that when you talk about being at the frontier of something?

Alexander Embiricos (01:09:12):
Codex writes a lot of the code that helps manage its training runs, the key infrastructure. We move pretty fast and so we have a Codex code review is catching a lot of mistakes. It's actually cause some pretty interesting configuration mistakes. And we're starting to see glimpses of the future where we're actually starting to have Codex even be on call for its own training, which is pretty interesting. So there's lots there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:38):
Wait, what does that mean to be on call for its own training? So it's running, it's training and it's like, "Oh, something broke, someone needs..." And does it alert people or it's like, "Here, I'm going to fix the problem and restart"?

Alexander Embiricos (01:09:47):
This is an early idea that we're figuring out. But the basic idea is that during a training run, there's a bunch of graphs that today humans are looking at and it's really important to look at those. We call this babysitting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:59):
Because it's very expensive to train, I imagine, and very important to move fast and-

Alexander Embiricos (01:10:03):
Exactly. And there's a lot of systems underlying the training run. And so a system could go down or there could be an error somewhere that gets introduced. And so we might need to fix it or pause things or, I don't know, there's lots of actions we might need to take. And so basically having Codex run on a loop to evaluate how those charts are moving over time is this idea that we have to how to enable us to train way more efficiently.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:26):
I love that. And this is very much along the lines of this is the future of agents. Codex isn't just for building code, it's a lot more than that.

Alexander Embiricos (01:10:34):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:36):
Okay, last question. Being at OpenAI, I can't not ask about your AGI timeline and how far you think we are from AGI. I know this isn't what you work on, but there's a lot of opinions, a lot of, I don't know, timelines. How far do you think we are from a humanly human version of AI, whatever that means to you?

Alexander Embiricos (01:10:56):
For me, I think that it's a little bit about when do we see the acceleration curves go like this? Or I don't know which way I'm mirrored here. When do we see the hockey stick? And I think that the current limiting factor, I mean, there's many, but I think a current underappreciated limiting factor is literally human typing speed or human multitasking speed on writing prompts. And like you were talking about, it's like you can have an agent watch all the work you're doing, but if you don't have the agent also validating its work, then you're still bottlenecked on can you go review all that code?

(01:11:29):
So my view is that we need to unblock those productivity loops from humans having to prompt and humans having to manually validate all the work. So if we can rebuild systems to let the agent be default useful, we'll start unlocking hockey sticks. Unfortunately, I don't think that's going to be binary. I think it's going to be very dependent on what you're building. So I would imagine that next year, if you're a startup and you're building new pieces, like some new app or something, it'll be possible for you to set it up on a stack where agents are much more self-sufficient than not. But now let's say, I don't know, you mentioned SAP, let's say you work in SAP, they have many complex systems and they're not going to be able to just get the agent to be self-sufficient overnight in those systems. So they're going to have to slowly maybe replace systems or update systems to allow the agent to handle more of the work end to end.

(01:12:22):
So basically my long answer to your question, maybe boring answer is that I think starting next year, we're going to see early adopters starting to hockey stick their productivity. And then over the years that follow, we're going to see larger and larger companies like hockey stick that productivity. And then somewhere in that fuzzy middle is when that hockey sticking will be flowing back into the AI labs and that's when we'll basically be at the AGI tier.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:48):
I love this answer. It's very practical and it's something that comes up a lot on this podcast. Just like the time to reveal all the things AI is doing is really annoying and a big bottleneck. I love that you're working on this because it's one thing to just make coding much more efficient and do that for people. It's another to take care of that final step of, "Okay, is this actually great?" And that's so interesting that your sense is that's the limiting factor. It comes back to your earlier point of even if AI did not advance anymore, we have so much more potential to unlock as we learn to use it more effectively. So that is a really unique answer. I haven't heard that perspective on what is the big unlock. Human typing speed to review basically what AI is doing for us. So good.

(01:13:31):
Okay, Alexander, we covered a lot of ground. Is there anything that we haven't covered? Is there anything you wanted to share, maybe double down on before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Alexander Embiricos (01:13:43):
I think one thing is that the Codex team is growing. And as I was just saying, we're still somewhat limited by human thinking speed and human typing speed. We're working on it. So if you're an engineer or a salesperson, or I'm hiring a product person, please hit us up. I'm not sure the best way to give contact info, but I guess you can go to our jobs page, or do they have contact for you actually? Do listeners have contact for you?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:10):
Where they send me like, "Hey, I want to apply to Codex"? I do have a contact form at lennyrachitsky.com. I'm afraid of all the amazing people that are going to ping me. But there we go, we could try that. Let's see how that goes.

Alexander Embiricos (01:14:20):
Okay. Or maybe an easier version, we can edit all that out or up to you. Yeah, or I would just say you can drop us a DM. For example, I'm Embirico on Twitter, and hit me up if you're interested in joining the team.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:33):
What a dream job for so many people. What's a sign they... I don't know, what's a way to filter people a little bit so they're not flooding your inbox?

Alexander Embiricos (01:14:42):
So specifically if you want to join the Codex team, then you need to be a technical person who uses these tools. And I think I would just ask yourself the question, "Hey, let's say I were to join OpenAI and work on Codex over the next six months and crush it, what does the life of a software engineer look like then?" And I think if you have an opinion on that, you should apply. And if you don't have an opinion on that and have to think about it first, depending on how long you have to think about it, I guess that would be the filter. I think there's a lot of people thinking about this space. So we're very interested in folks who have already been thinking about what the future should look like with agents. And we don't have to agree on where we're going, but I think we want people who are very passionate about the topic, I guess.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:28):
It's very rare to be working on a product that has this much impact and is at such a bleeding edge of where it's possible. What a cool role for the right person. So it's awesome that you have an opening and this audience is a really good fit potentially for that role. So I hope we find someone, that would be incredible. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you, Alexander. Are you ready?

Alexander Embiricos (01:15:54):
I don't know what these are, but I'm excited. Let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:57):
They're the same questions I ask everyone except for the last one. So probably not a surprise. I should probably make them more often a surprise. Okay, first question, what are a couple of books that you recommend most to other people, two or three books that come to mind?

Alexander Embiricos (01:16:12):
I have been reading a lot of science fiction recently, and I'm sure this has been recommended before, but The Culture, I think it's Ian Banks is the name of the author. Part of why I love it is because it's basically relatively recent writing about a future with AI, but it's an optimistic future with AI. And I think a lot of sci-fi is fairly dystopian. But the joke, at least on The Culture subreddit is that, let me see if I can get this right, it is a space communist utopia, or I think it's a gay space communist utopia. And I just think it's really fun to think about, to use The Culture as a way to think about what kind of world can we usher in and what decisions can we make today to help usher in that world.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:02):
Wow. I don't think anyone's recommended that. I know you're reading, you've mentioned before I start recording, Lord of the Rings right now. If you want another AI-ish sci-fi book, have you read Fire Upon the Deep?

Alexander Embiricos (01:17:15):
No, I haven't.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:15):
Okay, it's incredibly good. It's like a sci-fi space opera sort of epic tale with super intelligence.

Alexander Embiricos (01:17:25):
Cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:25):
Yeah. Mostly not optimistic, but somewhat optimistic.

(01:17:30):
Okay, next question. Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Alexander Embiricos (01:17:36):
Yeah, there's an anime called Jujutsu Kaisen, which I really like. Again, it's got a slightly dark topic of demons. But what I love about it is that the hero is really nice. And I think there's this new wave of anime and cartoons where the protagonists are really friendly and people who care about the world rather than being sort of, if you look at some older anime that started the genre, there's Evangelion or Akita and those characters, the protagonists are deeply flawed, quite unhappy. They didn't start the genre, but it was a trend for a while to poke fun at the idea that in these cartoons the protagonist was very young, but being given a ridiculous amount of responsibility to save the world. So there was kind of a wave of content that was critiquing this by making the character basically go through serious mental issues in the middle of the show. And I'm not saying this is better, but at least it's quite fun to have these really positive protagonists are just trying to help everyone around them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:43):
I love how much we're learning about your personality hearing these recommendations. Nice protagonists, optimistic futures. I like the [inaudible 01:18:53].

Alexander Embiricos (01:18:53):
I think if you don't believe it, you can't will it into existence. So you need a balance.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:57):
This is your training data.

(01:18:59):
Is there a product you recently discovered you really love? Could be an app, could be some clothing, could be some kitchen gadget, tech gadget, a hat.

Alexander Embiricos (01:19:09):
Yeah, so I have been quite into combustion engines and cars. Actually, the reason I came to America initially was because I wanted to work on US aircraft, but now I work in software. And so for the longest time, I've basically only had quite old sports cars, old just because they were more affordable. And then recently we got a Tesla instead. And I have to say that I find the Tesla software quite inspiring. In particular, it has the self-driving feature. And I've mentioned a few times today, I think it's really interesting to think about how to build mixed initiative software that makes you feel maximally empowered as a human, maximally in control, but yet you're getting a lot of help. And I think they did a really good job with enabling the car to drive itself, but all these different ways that you can adjust what it's doing without turning off the self-driving. So you can accelerate, it'll listen to that. You can turn a knob to change its speed. You can steer slightly. I think it's actually a masterclass in building an agent that still leaves the human in control.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:21):
This reminds me Nick Turley's whole mantra is, "Are we maximally accelerated?"

Alexander Embiricos (01:20:26):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:26):
Feels like it's completely infiltrated everything at OpenAI, which makes sense, that tracks.

(01:20:32):
Two more questions. Do you have a life motto that you often think about and come back to in work or in life that's been helpful?

Alexander Embiricos (01:20:39):
I don't know if I have a life motto, but maybe I can tell you about the number one company value from my startup.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:45):
Love it.

Alexander Embiricos (01:20:46):
Which is still something that sticks with me, which is to be kind and candid.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:51):
That tracks. Kind and candid. Wow, that's a great combo.

Alexander Embiricos (01:20:54):
Yeah. And we had to put them together because we, as founders, realized that we often would be nice and it wasn't actually the right thing to do. We would delay the difficult conversations and we were not candid. And so every time we would remind ourselves of this motto and then we would become more candid. And then six months later, we would realize that we were in fact not candid six months ago and we needed to be even more candid. So then the question is like, "Okay, how should we be candid?" It's like, "Okay, well, let's think of being candid as an act of kindness," but also think of that both in terms of doing it and willing ourselves to do it, but also in terms of how we frame it as people.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:32):
That is a beautiful way of summarizing how to lead well. What's the book about challenge directly but care deeply? Radical Candor.

Alexander Embiricos (01:21:43):
Yeah, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:44):
So it's like another way of thinking about Radical Candor.

(01:21:46):
Okay, last question. I was looking up your last name just like, "Hey, what's the story here?" So your last name is Embiricos, and I was talking at ChatGPT and it told me the most famous individuals with the surname are the influential Greek poet and psychoanalyst Andreas Embiricos and his relative, the wealthy shipping magnate and art collector, George Embiricos. So the question is, which of these two do you most identify with, the Greek poet and psychoanalyst or the wealthy shipping magnate and art collector?

Alexander Embiricos (01:22:19):
I think it's going to have to be the poet because he loved the island that our family's from.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:27):
Wait, you know those people? Okay, this is not news to you. Okay.

Alexander Embiricos (01:22:30):
Well, I mean, it's an enormous family. But it's like Greek, so these big families, everyone's your uncle.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:30):
Love this. Okay.

Alexander Embiricos (01:22:36):
You know what I mean? My mother's Malaysian and also everyone is my uncle or aunt in Malaysia too, if that makes sense.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:42):
Yeah.

Alexander Embiricos (01:22:43):
But yeah, he loved this island that the family initiated from. I believe, I don't actually know where that's shipping magnate lived, I think it was New York or something. But anyway, we all came from this island called Andros, which is a really beautiful place. And it's like there's more livestock there than humans. Not too many tourists go there. But I think part of what I think is really cool is he published a lot and a lot of his writing is about the beauty of that island, which I think is super cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:12):
Wow, that was an amazing answer.

(01:23:14):
Two more questions, where can folks find you if they want to follow you online and maybe reach out? And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Alexander Embiricos (01:23:20):
I'm one of those people who has social media only for the purposes of having work. My phone turns black and white at 9:00 PM at night. But yeah, so Twitter or X, @Embirico. And yeah, if you post in r/Codex, I'll probably see it. So you can go there.

(01:23:40):
How can listeners be useful? I would say please try Codex, please share feedback, let us know what to improve. We pay a ton of attention to feedback. I think, honestly, the growth has been amazing, but it's still very early times, so we still pay a lot of attention and hope to do so forever. And also, I would say if you're interested in working on the future of coding agents and then agents generally, then please apply to our job site and/or message me in those social media places.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:10):
Alexander, this was awesome. I always love meeting people working on AI because it always feels like this very, I don't know, sterile, scary, mysterious thing. And then you meet the people building these tools and they're always just so awesome, and you especially, just so nice. And like the examples you shared, optimism and kindness, this is what we want to be. These are the kinds of people we want to be building these tools that are going to drive the future. So I'm really thankful that you did this. I'm grateful to have met you, and thank you so much for being here.

Alexander Embiricos (01:24:45):
Yeah, thanks so much for having me. This was fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:48):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Andy Johns (00:00:00):
There are day-to-day stresses that are normal and we just have to put up with, but then there's the other stuff that's the flashing red alarm. Again, you can go back to animals. It's like when their fundamental functions, when their core behaviors of diet, exercise, playfulness, socialization, sleep, when those things get disrupted, it's a sign that there is something going on here that you need to take a look at. 

(00:00:27):
So the same is true with people. If your sleep always sucks, if your relationships are constantly strained or frequently strained, if your physical health is failing, there's so many ways that that can be measured. So there's really no excuse for that to say, "Oh, I just didn't know." I'd say it's to look at those things. When those are suffering or when they're really out of whack, it's undeniable that there is something that is detrimental to your wellbeing that's going on right now, and your body is telling you, "Stop. Something needs to change."

Lenny (00:01:03):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today, my guest is Andy Johns. This is going to be a very different type of episode and maybe the most meaningful and important episode of the podcast. 

(00:01:21):
Andy was a legendary product and growth leader at Facebook, Twitter, Quora, and Wealthfront, where he was VP of Growth and VP of Product, and then President, and as you'll hear, was in line to be CEO of Wealthfront until he came to realize that this path was not right for him. After a lot of internal reflection and hard self-work, he changed his entire life's path to becoming a mental health advocate and helping burned out high achievers and also veterans with their mental health journey. 

(00:01:48):
In our conversation, Andy shares his personal story, what true burnout looks like, and when you should pay attention to your mental health. Talks about the process of deep personal transformation and the four steps involved in making lasting change in your life. He also shares how to actually allow change to happen in your life, tactics for moving down this path, and a lot of advice and real talk on mental health and tech.

(00:02:10):
There's a lot of struggle happening in the world right now, including in tech, and so I hope this conversation helps you with your own journey. You can check out Andy's work at Clues.Life. With that, I bring you Andy Johns after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:26):
This episode is brought to you by Mercury, who I also happen to use for my business checking account. I've tried a lot of business banks and there is nothing even close to the experience you get with Mercury. I moved cash over from another bank and it literally took less than half an hour to set up the account and wire money over at no cost. They make you want to use the site more often, which I had never felt with another banking site. Mercury is banking engineered for the startup journey, a modern solution to help your company become the best version of itself.

(00:02:56):
Mercury isn't just a place to hold and send money. It's software built to help you scale with safety and stability, whether you're a team of two or a team of a thousand. Mercury also goes beyond banking to provide you with access to the foremost investors, operators, and tools. Visit mercury.com to join over 100,000 startups on Mercury, the powerful and intuitive way for ambitious companies to bank. Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank & Trust. Members FDIC.

(00:03:29):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. You've heard me talk about how Coda is the doc that brings it all together, and how can it help your team run smoother and be more efficient. I know this firsthand because Coda does that for me. I use Coda every day to wrangle my newsletter content calendar, my interview notes for podcasts, and to coordinate my sponsors. More recently, I actually wrote a whole post on how Coda's product team operates, and within that post, they shared a dozen templates that they use internally to run their product team, including managing the roadmap, their OKR process, getting internal feedback, and essentially their whole product development process is done within Coda. 

(00:04:07):
If your team's work is spread out across different documents and spreadsheets and a stack of workflow tools, that's why you need Coda. Coda puts data in one centralized location regardless of format, eliminating roadblocks that can slow your team down. Coda allows your team to operate on the same information and collaborate in one place. Take advantage of this special limited time offer just for startups. Plan up today at coda.io/lenny and get a thousand dollars starter credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A dot I-O slash Lenny to sign up and get a startup credit of $1,000, coda.io/lenny.

(00:04:49):
Andy, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast. 

Andy Johns (00:04:53):
Thanks, Lenny. Happy to be here.

Lenny (00:04:54):
So I've been both looking forward to our conversation, but I've also been dreading it a little bit because I know it's going to be incredibly valuable, but I also think it's going to get very heavy, and I think it's important to get heavy sometimes, especially with the stuff we're going to be talking about, but just wanted to share that.

Andy Johns (00:05:09):
Yeah, and I'm looking forward to that. I think one of the things that has been a change for me over the last several years is that I prefer to move forward in my life being completely honest with who I am, not hiding any aspects of myself, including the stuff that in the past I'd be afraid to share. 

Lenny (00:05:29):
Well, on that topic, I'd love for you to just walk us through the path that you've taken. Basically, you're like me in a sense. You're helping companies build product, drive growth, worked with some of the best companies in the world, and then things took a turn. So could you just start with a brief overview of what happened? 

Andy Johns (00:05:48):
Sure. So the short background is I spent about 17 years working in the world of startups. I think on the whole, it was a successful experience. I managed to land at a handful of really good companies and had a great experience, but along the way, despite having built somewhat of an impressive resume, I guess you could say, I was also struggling quite a bit in terms of my emotional, psychological, and spiritual health. So in some ways, it feels like the cliche that as my career reached its pinnacle, that from a professional, from a financial perspective, I was at my highest, but when it came to other aspects of my life, I was arguably at my lowest or close to my lowest. 

(00:06:43):
So even though I had those successes, there was a lot that I needed to work through that was under the hood, which I eventually came to understand very, very deeply as a result of turning inward and doing a lot of work on my own path towards self-understanding and healing some deep emotional wounds.

Lenny (00:07:04):
In a post that you worked on for my newsletter back in the day, you shared this story of, I think maybe it was at Wealthfront where you were giving a big presentation. Maybe share that story?

Andy Johns (00:07:14):
Sure. I can share that. It actually goes back to ... This is 2010. I was at Twitter at the time. I was in my late 20s. Again, my career was going really well. I was starting to string together a series of successful experiences, and I was suddenly hit with near constant panic, panic attacks, depression. I was having a very, very difficult time sleeping and just managing my emotions as a whole. It got to the point to where there were several occasions while I was at work where I could tell that I was about ready to have a breakdown of sorts, and I would just grab my laptop, throw it in my bag, and pretty quietly just walk out of the office even if it was 10:00 AM and I'd only been there for an hour or two. That happened on multiple occasions. 

(00:08:07):
There were some occasions in which I was set up to go and speak to the entire company during an all-hands session, and it was something where I just had to come up with an excuse and bow out of it because at the time, I was already completely overcome and overwhelmed by this near constant panic I was experiencing, but I had a really good poker face, I don't think most people could see it.

(00:08:34):
To give a little bit of an explanation and to tie first question together with this, there were two major things that contributed to me having a pretty acute case of burnout and needing to step away from my career as I knew it. The first was just the slow and steady accumulation of the pressure, the stresses, the anxieties, the emotional ups and downs that came from having such a strong commitment to my career, and frankly an addiction to achievement as a way to feel good and to feel whole, but I was so focused on my work that I had slowly become the frog that was boiling in the pot, the typical analogy of you don't realize how bad things are getting because it's happening to you slowly until it happens quickly, right?

(00:09:38):
So on one hand, I was not only struggling emotionally and psychologically because of the pressures of the career and climbing the ladder and just the common existential angst that comes with being at a startup and not knowing what the future holds. What I later came to understand was that I was also starting to experience and to address old emotional pain that I'd buried for a very long time, stemming back to the death of my mom when I was 10. She was severely mentally ill. She was bipolar, had bouts of psychosis, and had spent time in and out of psychiatric hospitals. I can remember going to those hospitals as some of my earliest memories as a kid.

(00:10:33):
So there was a lot of disruption in my childhood, a lot of neglect, some occasional abuse, and then it culminated with the loss of the most important female figure in my life when I was 10. Of course, like anyone else after that, I was in a lot of pain emotionally, but as a kid, you don't have the tools or even the capabilities to effectively process something as significant and traumatic as an experience like that. 

(00:11:11):
So my mind did what the mind of most children will do, which is it finds a way to bury it or to ignore it. The thing that I had latched onto that made me feel better was that anytime I hit a home run or scored a goal or got straight A's and was just basically a stellar student and a stellar athlete, I was showered with love, not only from my family, which is fantastic, but from society at large, especially within the world that we live in.

(00:11:44):
So I learned very early on that if I wanted to feel good, I needed to achieve, and that if I wanted to love myself and be considered lovable by others, I needed to achieve. That pulled me out of a darkness that I was in for several years as a kid, and I'm glad that it did, and it led to an excellent experience in high school, in college, and then well into my 20s, but eventually, those emotional wounds are going to come to the surface. They're going to come up for error, and when they do, it's going to be difficult, and that's what happened with me. 

(00:12:24):
So it was really two things coming together at the same time. It was the growing pressures of an escalating career within the dynamic industry, but then also, I think, the natural maturation of my mind and of adult development such that it was time for that old pain to come to the surface, and when it did, it was very disruptive and it's something that I'm still continuing to work on to this day.

Lenny (00:12:55):
I imagine many people listening either resonate with some of this or just like, "This is exactly the life I'm living." I know you work with people now helping them through these challenges, especially in tech. So two questions there. One is just you've done polls around this. Just what percentage of people in tech have you seen struggle with these sorts of things on some degree?

Andy Johns (00:13:16):
For the last two years, I've been doing a lot of writing, and most of my writing has really just been me opening up and sharing this personal side of what was going on behind the scenes. Along the way, I've been able to connect with, at this point, hundreds of folks in the tech industry who are dealing with their own forms of burnout or their own deep existential questions that are coming to the surface and they're trying to understand them.

(00:13:48):
So from some of the surveys I've put out from my own anecdotal experience and from some proper research that's been conducted by experts who focus on entrepreneur and high performer wellbeing, I'd say that it's a fair estimate to say that at least 50% to 60% of tech employees who have, just to give it a bit more nuance, who have been in the saddle, so to speak, for a minimum of five to seven years, they're experiencing some form of psychological and emotional distress. It may be minor enough such that they think it's just day-to-day anxiety, but it's often much more significant than people realize because, again, it creeps up on you slowly and then all of a sudden it hits you quickly.

Lenny (00:14:42):
We're going to dive into what this looks like and ways you've found to be helpful to people. One last question before we get there. You walked away from a pretty senior incredible role, and in the post that you wrote, you shared the salary you gave up in that giving up. Can you just talk about what that last role was and then what you had to give up to change career paths and [inaudible 00:15:05]

Andy Johns (00:15:04):
Yeah. So one of the things that I did towards the tail end of my career as I became a consumer or founding partner of the consumer arm of an early stage venture capital firm, and most folks know that especially once a fund gets big enough, it can be a high paying job. Suddenly, I found myself in a position where I was making high six figures per year into early seven figures. When I look back on it in retrospect, I had put in so much effort to get to that point really going back to when I was 10 years old, having always been the straight A student and captain of whatever team I was on. 

(00:15:46):
From the age of 10 to basically 35, I was switched on, constantly seeking to perform at the top of whatever my field was. So I gotten to that point first as an executive at a high growth startup, that was Wealthfront, and I became president and was next in line to be CEO before I had a health scare with my heart that led to me stepping away from the company because I knew I couldn't take on the CEO position. Then here I was six or seven months later, again, very subconsciously driven by the desire to succeed because underneath that was the sense that I wasn't lovable unless I was succeeding. 

(00:16:30):
Here I was after a heart attack scare at the age of 35 sweeping that under the carpet like I'd swept so much stuff under the carpet and choosing to join on as a founding partner of a venture capital firm, which is not an easy job at all, and especially when you're starting a new firm up, it's, in a lot of ways, it's a company in and of its own. So it was another startup. It was my sixth startup in a row. 

(00:16:59):
So three years into that though, even though I was working on my own mental health and my emotional wellbeing, I had convinced myself repeatedly for so many years that everything was okay and that I could continue to put my head down and run through these walls, these professional walls and keep going, but it got to a point to where that was no longer the case. 

(00:17:32):
In fact, it was the culmination of conversations with my doctors and with the experts that I've been working with where I ended up actually spending 45 days in a mental health institute myself. It was something that was extremely difficult to do. It was something that certainly contributed or was really the tip of the sphere of me stepping away from my career of realizing that the only reason I was continuing to push forward despite how poorly I felt on the inside was because of stuff that had happened to me when I was much younger and because of the fallible nature of the human mind and how it wants to interpret experiences and ways that can become so self-critical and self damaging.

(00:18:32):
So that happened for me roughly three years ago. Needless to say, my life has changed quite a bit since then, and I'm happy to chat more about that, but that was a difficult decision to walk away from my career at the peak of it, but I guess the takeaway, and then I'll stop for a bit, is it's important for people to understand that there are formative experiences in our lives which put us in positions to where we form adaptations in order to survive, just like my attachment to achievement and how my self-worth was entirely tied up in that.

(00:19:14):
I needed that when I was younger because I was heartbroken, I lost a parent, and that adaptation that I formed saved my life when I was young, and it gave me a great childhood after that, and a great next couple of decades, but these adaptations, if you're unaware of them and if you're unaware of the subconscious drivers that are responsible for them, they run the risk that they go too far, and that these adaptations, which were initially beneficial to you and to your life, they reverse course in a sense, and they become detrimental to your present state and your future development. 

(00:20:04):
So my stepping away from the career, stepping away from the high salary, and stepping away from everything I'd worked so hard to obtain was an action that I took in recognition of the fact that that early life adaptation had now gone awry and was responsible for my life heading in a negative direction and it was time to change.

Lenny (00:20:30):
The gift of your experience going through all that is that now we can all benefit learning from that. You spend your time these days helping people get over a lot of these challenges that they have. Can you just talk about what it is you spend your time on specifically? Then let's unpack the process that you've come up with to help people through this.

Andy Johns (00:20:52):
Now, when people ask me what I do, I say I do mental health advocacy, and I do it in a few ways. One is I sit on the board of a nonprofit called Heroic Hearts Project, and what we do is we raise money so that we can pay for military veterans with PTSD to get access to alternative therapies, namely psychedelic assisted psychotherapy. It was started by a handful of veterans. I was lucky enough to meet a few of them a couple of years ago. Given my own personal experience with PTSD stemming from my childhood experiences, I was bonded together with these men and women of the Armed Forces who had, in many cases, not only their own personal trauma, but also war trauma. So that's one organization that I'm thankful to be able to work with and help out. 

(00:21:48):
I also write my newsletter and have created a new website that I'm toying with. In general, my writing and the content that I've put out is focused on the unhappy achievers, the other folks like myself who are out there, which there's quite a few of us. I write in order to express my personal experience because I think there's many others that can relate. So those are the things that I've been working on and a little bit of coaching with some of the high performers as well.

Lenny (00:22:23):
Throw out the website in case people want to check it out while we're talking.

Andy Johns (00:22:26):
The website that I'm playing around with is called Clues.Life, clues as in questions, clues, not truth dot life or facts dot life. I called it Clues Dot Life for a reason because if there's one thing that I've learned in my own personal journey, it's that given the immense heterogeneity of the human population and how we're all born unique and then we're made further unique through our own individual life experiences, the thing that's clear to me is that if somebody is going through their own struggles, at the end of the day, they have to find the philosophies, the tools, and the methods that work for them. 

(00:23:08):
You can read plenty of studies, you can read the books, you can listen to what others are doing, but at the end of the day, you got to personalize it to yourself. So that's why I called it Clues Dot Life because I'm building this library of mental health information that allows people to navigate all of this information in search of their own clues.

Lenny (00:23:28):
Awesome, and we'll link to that in the show notes, but it's an easy URL to remember. Something you spent a lot of your time on as you've talked about is helping people through deep personal transformation. That's the way you describe it. What is involved in that process of someone going through a deep personal transformation?

Andy Johns (00:23:47):
I love this question. So most of the conversations I have are with folks who are going through significant change. Now, what's involved in that? It can happen on a spectrum where everyone's process is unique. We all change and unfold in identical ways. Some can go through subtle shifts. I've heard this referred to as a micro transition, where, for example, they may be working at a tech industry or at a tech company, but this specific company they're working at, they have no real values connection to it. So part of their suffering is the fact that they feel that the work that they're doing doesn't really matter or they don't feel a connection to it. So switching to work at a different company that's aligned with something that's consistent with their values, that may be enough for somebody to go through a small transition and then find themselves in a happier place. 

(00:24:52):
The transitions that I talk about are the big fundamental ones like the transition that I've been going through myself. Now, what's involved in that? I think that there are four parts, just to give it a simple general framework. Step one is it begins with suffering. These large transitions in life rarely take place in the absence of suffering. So step number one is suffer. Usually, the deeper somebody suffers, the more significant the transition that may follow. There's a reason why in the 12 steps community like Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, you name it, there's a reason that rock bottom is in the vernacular because rock bottom tends to proceed somebody getting sober. So step one is suffering. 

(00:25:53):
Step two is seeking the truth behind why we suffer. Once the suffering gets so bad in somebody through some spiritual intervention, a legal intervention, the intervention of friends and family, whatever it may be, they decide to change, and in order to change, you have to understand the truth as to who you are and why you are the way you are and why you're suffering. The answer lies in understanding the truth, and that is usually a long process. Digging through the subconscious mind, digging through your history and your past, digging through your relationships, that takes a lot of time. It takes a lot of time to remove the mental blocks that we might've spent decades developing such that we don't even see these patterns that we play out regularly. 

(00:26:51):
So first, you begin with suffering, and then second, you seek the truth for your suffering. What I have found, and that leads to step three in the process, is that once you discover the truth of your suffering, the real root cause of it and where it came from, that's when you move to step three, which is you begin to experience and to practice self-compassion and self-love because inevitably, what you discover through this process of seeking the truth is that your suffering isn't necessarily your fault. Maybe you're suffering because of things that you experienced or had to go through of which you had no control over.

(00:27:44):
Nonetheless, it's common for the mind, especially the mind of a child, to interpret those less than nurturing experiences as, "This happened because of me." So what sits at the core of their suffering is not only a low sense of self, but a shame, a shame regarding who they are and who they believe themselves to be. 

(00:28:08):
When you dig deep enough into your own self-understanding, eventually you'll discover that that's not true, that it isn't your fault, that these things swept you up like a wave, and you were just along for a ride of which you had no choice. When you understand that and you start to feel a sense of forgiveness and to begin to love yourself for the first time, you make this switch where then you're willing to live in a way that is more consistent with self-love and self-compassion. 

(00:28:45):
So me, for example, stepping away from my career, at the end of the day, I wasn't running from something, I was running back towards myself. That was an act of kindness towards myself. Going into a 45-day hospitalization, that was an act of love. So what ends up happening is the truth fuels that process of self-love, and when you begin to live in a way that is consistent with valuing yourself and understanding that it's not your fault, then that's when you move to step four, which is compassion towards others because by understanding yourself and realizing the true nature of why you are the way you are and forgiving yourself because you understand it's not your fault, guess what? You see the same thing in everybody else. 

(00:29:46):
This is what is meant when folks sometimes say we're all adults or we're all children walking around in adult bodies, right? We're just acting out the things that were done to us in the past because when I think of the human mind, there are many ways that you can describe what the brain is, but one way that I describe it certainly is that it's autobiographical. It tries to predict what's going to happen next based on what happened in the past. It's a prediction engine. That's what it does, and that's why I say it's autobiographical because the way that you present yourself to the world as an adult is a reflection of what happened to you in the past, the messages you were told, the ways you were conditioned by society, maybe the traumas you experienced. 

(00:30:36):
So that's the process as I see it of deep, deep, deep transformation. It's that four-step process of the suffering, the seeking of truth, the living in a way that is compassionate towards oneself, and then living in a way that is compassionate towards others. When you do that, you change. Think of that as the horizontal foundation to which the rest of your external life is built. The place you choose to live, the partner you choose to have, the friends you have, the career you have, all of these things are erections on top of a foundation of identity, and that identity is what is completely rewired when somebody goes through that four-step process, and as a result, everything that's built on top of that identity, it doesn't necessarily have to change, but it might.

Lenny (00:31:41):
That feels like a reason somebody wouldn't want to go down this journey of, "I don't want to change everything about myself."

Andy Johns (00:31:48):
Yes, and this is the power of the human mind at work or what someone referred to as the ego. As soon as the ego senses that something wants to challenge it and to undermine its authority, it finds a way to push it away. It finds a way to ignore it because it is a very difficult process. I now understand what some philosophers described as death before dying. In this process of change that I've been going through, it's been the death of the old me, the death of Andy whose identity was entirely attached to succeeding, and that old Andy doesn't want to let go. It's been around for a few decades. It believes that it's there to protect me. 

(00:32:46):
This is a survival mechanism that's somewhat gone awry within the context of modern life. So it doesn't want to let go, but that's what I've been doing. That's the process I've been going through is slowly but surely finding a way to take my fingers off the steering wheel and to let that old sense of self die, and then in doing so create the room for what's next, whatever that may be. I'm three years into the process of discovering what that will be. So we'll see.

Lenny (00:33:24):
Thinking through these four steps, suffering sounds like people will just do that naturally, potentially, and I feel like it gets hard at the understanding the source of that suffering. I guess, one, is that true or do people try to resist that suffering and are just like, "Nah, it's okay, it's okay," and they white knuckle it?

Andy Johns (00:33:45):
I think you're pretty spot on with it. This dips into a lot of the ancient Eastern spiritual traditions of just this recognition that life involves suffering. One way or another, there's going to be suffering. I think of it as there's two types of suffering. There's the necessary suffering like we're going to get old and our bodies are going to hurt and we're going to have physical ailments and toothaches and shit's just going to happen and we're going to lose the people we love, all of us, and the 80 to a hundred billion homo sapiens that live before us gone through the same thing. 

(00:34:29):
So there is necessary suffering in life or the mandatory suffering, and then there's the unnecessary suffering, which is the suffering that is almost entirely, and I think the argument could be made that it's entirely made up in our minds. This is the superpowers of the human mind gone awry again in the modern context. So there's going to be a lot of suffering one way or another. I think if there's a goal or objective, it's to minimize the unnecessary suffering, but the seeking of the truth part is very difficult. It takes years.

(00:35:10):
There's a reason that, again, in some of these spiritual traditions, let's take Buddhism for example, there's a reason that there's so much structure and discipline and there's a daily method that they adhere to because it turns out it takes daily practice. In the same way that if you want to get extremely fit and climb Mount Everest, that's not something you do by just getting off the couch, right? It takes a dedication to it. I think that the seeking of truth takes that dedication, and that's, again, why I believe that the first step is almost always suffering because to undergo that process of personal transformation, which can be very difficult, and it can feel like you're in a life raft and you've just pushed away from the shore completely untethered, uncertain of where you're floating. In order to work up the courage to get to that point, things typically have to get pretty bad.

(00:36:09):
You say, "I can't fucking do this anymore. I'm not going to live like this. Something's got to change." So much of that seeking of the truth is actually at first driven by intense fear, fear of going back to how bad things were and feeling that bad again. Eventually, the process changes tone when you move past the fear stage and you understand yourself enough and then you start to look forward optimistically towards the future, where instead of just being driven by fear, you're also pulled forward by a vision for the future that inspires you. So that eventually comes, but to begin with, yes, this process of discovering the truth is very, very, very, very difficult. It requires a personal commitment. It's not something anyone else can do for you.

Lenny (00:37:02):
With that context in mind that it's very difficult, I imagine many people listening are like, "Yes, I have a lot of suffering that I'm going through. Life is hard, work is hard, work is too crazy," especially product managers and founders that listen to this podcast.

Andy Johns (00:37:19):
I know. To all the VPs of Product out there, I'm so sorry. I've been in your shoes.

Lenny (00:37:24):
So with that, say someone wanted to go down this path and understand the truth of what is the source of this suffering that you even described as unnecessary and made up, what would the first couple steps be of knowing that it's going to take years potentially of how to actually try to understand this?

Andy Johns (00:37:40):
Commonly in the West, the first step that makes a lot of sense is you turn to somebody who's trained in helping you figure out what those truths are, which is a therapist or a psychologist or a psychiatrist or a counselor. Sometimes people turn to religious or spiritual leaders because they can be quite gifted in this as well. That's the most common step. 

(00:38:02):
That's the first step that I turn to when I was just completely stricken by panic and terrified that I might harm myself. I said, "I got to figure out what the hell's going on because I can't live feeling like this," and all I knew to do was reach out to a therapist, and that is a wonderful first start because if anything, they're not going to have all the answers, but they can act like a router, where as they're helping you understand yourself and they're really understanding you, they're thinking about, "Okay. Who might this person also benefit from speaking with? Let's route them to this person that specializes in body-based work, somatic work. Let's send this person to somebody that specializes in nervous system management through breath work or other things." So seeking a therapist is a pretty good first step.

Lenny (00:39:00):
Any advice on how to figure out who the right therapist or wrong therapist is for you? I know you've actually shared somewhere on LinkedIn once that there's also a lot of disagreement within the mental health community of what is the right approach and what's the right solution.

Andy Johns (00:39:13):
It's like speed dating at first because I would argue that the most important factor is that you feel safe. Animals can teach us so much about what it means to heal ourselves. Imagine going to the pound and you go in there and there's a bunch of dogs that have been picked up off the street or that have been abandoned, and the vast majority of them, they're a nervous wreck, right? Their tail is down in between their legs. They're hunched over and they might be shaking. Their nervous system is completely overwhelmed. That is not the time to teach a dog tricks. When the dog still can't come out the corner of the kennel is not the time to teach it how to sit. Once that dog can make it into the arms of an owner that it feels safe with and loved by, that's when you see the dog transform and change, and that's when you can teach it a lot because it's open and receptive to it.

(00:40:21):
So that's number one in my advice is speed date if you've got the opportunity to and try out a few therapists and just go based on intuition, what just feels right to you, and you're going to want to fall into that feeling of comfort. Now, a quick asterisk on that. Of course if you're in real distress, if you're in a bad place, just see whatever professional you can as soon as possible. That's what I did. I was fortunate to where the first one that I saw was also fantastic. I ended up seeing many other specialists over the years, but that first one, she was wonderful.

(00:41:05):
So it's essential that you feel comfortable with them. I would also say, this one's a little controversial, but you're going to want a therapist that is at least as intelligent, if not more intelligent than you because I think part of that openness to learning from them and to feeling somewhat comfortable but also feeling inspired and looking forward to it as if sometimes they say things that make you say, "Oh, shit. Wow. Wow, I never thought of that. That was smart," or, "That was a wonderful insight." I don't think if you respect their intellectual abilities, then it's going to be difficult for them to help you. They may not be able to communicate on the same wavelength. So you really want to look for that intuitive feeling of something that is safe and comfortable. Ideally, if you can find somebody with some intellectual horsepower that matches your own, honestly, I think the rest after that is just implementation details.

Lenny (00:42:11):
If someone maybe isn't ready for a therapist and that's something about that just holds them back, is there another route that you would recommend people take or is it just go straight to a therapist?

Andy Johns (00:42:23):
Absolutely. Absolutely. If you're not in a state of distress, but you feel like there's something to be figured out, there's an ancient technology known as pen and paper. At the end of the day, the seeking of the truth involves the seeking of a deep sense of self-understanding, and if you can get into the daily practice of being able to sit down with pen and paper and write to yourself, to ask yourself questions, to really sit there and evaluate the thoughts that are running through your head, it is possible for somebody to, and I'll use the term, I won't get into it, but to reach some state of bliss or enlightenment or some real spiritual awakening, it is possible for somebody to do that entirely on their own with just pen and paper and a quiet room. 

(00:43:20):
I know people that have arrived at a deep place of self-love and self-understanding through those methods, and I know a lot of others, including myself, where the writing to others was really the writing to myself 15 years ago as a way for me to continue to understand myself more deeply. So I think pen and paper is deeply, deeply overlooked and underrated in this process.

Lenny (00:43:48):
Say you get a pen and paper, is there some guide or framework or something you'd point people to you to think through what to think about and how to approach this?

Andy Johns (00:43:58):
Yeah. There are different ways of doing it. Some advocate for a completely unstructured approach because what you want is you don't want to turn it into assignment. You want to feel your way into it. If something is bubbling up in your mind, just spit it out. Don't analyze why it's coming up, just allow it to flow. That method certainly works. Sit down with no agenda. On some days you'll write one sentence and that's enough, and on other days you'll write 10 pages and that's also enough. There's some magic to allowing the human mind to just work and to not interrupt it through some analytical process. 

(00:44:40):
On the flip side, if you want a little bit more structure, one thing you can do is I'd like to start with if the goal is to understand oneself, then one of the quickest ways of doing that is to quickly write down a list of simple bullet points of the most recent situations you can think of where you became most acutely reactionary and emotional. You could have been having a political conversation with somebody and they said something that really just you felt like you just wanted to reach out and strangle them. You could have felt deeply insecure in a social setting. 

(00:45:24):
Just run through those scenarios where something disrupted what might've been your current state of presence and calmness. When you identify those situations where there was some strong reaction, that is very revealing because that wasn't a conscious thought process that led to the reaction. That was a knee-jerk reaction. That was a reflex. If there's a reflex, then there's something that's underlying the reflex, and the question to then ask is, "Why did that happen?" 

(00:45:58):
Then from there, it's an unstructured process. Keep asking, keep digging, keep asking, "Okay. If this happened, why did that happen? Well ..." and then write a little bit, "Well, is that really the reason why? Was there something else?" Just keep working at it until you hit the truth, and you'll know what the truth is because it always feels either deeply uncomfortable or it feels like an epiphany.

Lenny (00:46:26):
Wow. For you that was recognizing that it was about your mom.

Andy Johns (00:46:32):
There were many parts of it. At its core, at first it began with a simple truth, which was I went into the therapist, I was describing what I was feeling, I was describing the uncontrollable thoughts and mental imagery that I was experiencing, and my sleep disruption, and my pounding heart, and everything else, and she said, "Yup, you're having panic attacks," and just knowing like, "Oh, there's a thing and it's called a panic attack," starting at that basic truth was enough in the moment to just take a little bit of the edge off. 

(00:47:18):
So this journey along the way is there are dozens of truths and then hundreds of truths, and then every now and then it's punctuated by the big, "Oh, holy shit. I never saw that coming," kind of truth. It's just what the experience is. I had many, many truths about myself that I discovered before I hit some of the fundamental ones that were at the core of my subconscious.

Lenny (00:47:48):
Following in that thread, what are signs that you're in need of this transformation versus, "Work is just stressful. Things are hard. I have some challenging meetings," which a lot of people go through on and off? I've had a lot of those. What are signs maybe you're boarding out or something that requires, "Wow, I really need to dig a lot deeper"?

Andy Johns (00:48:09):
There are day-to-day stresses that are normal and we just have to put up with, but then there's the other stuff that's the flashing red alarm. For me, and a lot of the research and literature supports this too, is, again, you can go back to animals. It's like when their fundamental functions, when their core behaviors of diet, exercise, playfulness, socialization, sleep, when those things get disrupted, it's a sign that there is something going on here that you need to take a look at. 

(00:48:49):
So the same is true with people. If your sleep always sucks, if your relationships are constantly strained or frequently strained, if your physical health is failing, there's so many ways that that can be measured so there's really no excuse for that to say, "Oh, I just didn't know," I'd say it's to look at those things. When those are suffering or when they're really out of whack, it's undeniable that there is something that is detrimental to your wellbeing that's going on right now, and your body is telling you, "Stop. Something needs to change." So that is number one to look at. Look at the fundamentals.

(00:49:43):
Reflecting on my own situation, I almost had a heart attack at 35, and I got the classic talk from a Stanford cardiologist saying, "You're just going to be another 40-something-year-old CEO with a broken heart." The years of really poor sleep, the number of teeth that I had broken that I had to have fixed multiple times because for years my grinding was so bad that I had to, now two times over, had to completely redo all the teeth, all my molars, and then most of the front teeth as well, and I just continued to move forward even though my body was, again, throwing out all the signals.

(00:50:31):
For anyone who's listening to this, especially for the folks who haven't, go get the book, The Body Keeps the Score by Bessel van der Kolk. He's a expert clinician who's worked with trauma patients for decades, and the entire book is basically one big message saying, "Hey, when mental health presents itself, look to the body because it's the body that is keeping the score." It's the body that's the scoreboard, and it's the body that is actually holding on to all of this shit you've been carrying for years, and eventually, the body breaks in the form of chronic disease and illness and so on and so forth.

Lenny (00:51:12):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro, an online collaborative whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours. The best way to see what Miro is all about and how it can help your team collaborate better is not to listen to me talk about it, but to go check it out for yourself. Go to miro.com/lenny. With the help of the Miro team, I created a super cool Miro board with two of my own favorite templates, my one pager template and my managing up template that you can plug and play and start using immediately with your team. I've also embedded a handful of my favorite templates that other people have published in the Miroverse. When you get to the board, you can also leave suggestions for the podcast, answer a question that I have for you, and generally just play around to get a sense of how it all works.

(00:51:56):
Miro is a killer tool for brainstorming with your team, laying out your strategy, sharing user research findings, capturing ideas, giving feedback on wireframes, and generally just collaborating with your colleagues. I actually used Miro to collaborate with the Miro team on creating my own board, and it was super fun and super easy. Go check it out at miro.com/lenny. That's M-I-R-O dot com slash Lenny. 

(00:52:22):
We've talked about the suffering step, then the understanding the truth of what is going on. Say someone sits down in a room, writes out what's going on, has this epiphany of, "Oh, wow, it's really this moment in my childhood that really led me to need to achieve and do all these things." The next step is self-compassion and recognizing that it's not your fault. That sounds very easy on the surface like, "Okay. I understand this is not my fault." I know it's not that easy. How do you go about actually deeply doing that steps?

Andy Johns (00:52:56):
It's likely this deeply internalized self-belief. You can think of that as one of the deepest grooves in the neural pathways in your mind. Now, that was the case for me, so deep that you don't even realize that it's there, it's omnipresent. It's going to take time to rewire that because what you're effectively trying to do is take an internal narrative and edit and rewrite that thing, and this internal narrative is probably at a foothold in you for years or decades. So it's reasonable to believe or to understand that, "Okay. If I have not had a high opinion of myself for 30 years, that's not going to change overnight." 

(00:53:50):
For some people, it miraculously does. That's not the norm. For most others, including myself, it starts with that truth stage because with truth is the awareness, "Okay. I understand that I have a low sense of self-worth, and I understand that it plays out in all these ways, and I have the awareness of it that now when I'm doing something that is a conditioned behavior or a conditioned response born out of that deep self-belief or that negative core belief, then when I spot it, there's an opportunity for me to intervene," and it starts in the simple ways. 

(00:54:31):
For example, I had a boss once where he would come over and he would give me praise all the time. He was wonderful human being, and I think I was doing a good job. One day, he swung by, he said, "Hey, amazing job," and my response was, "Oh, yeah, I did my best," and then he looked at me and he said, "Hey, say thank you or you're welcome. That's it. When somebody gives you a compliment, just say thanks, accept it." So it's become a pattern of mine now that if somebody gives me a compliment, I look them in the eyes and I say, "Thank you," and I really try and embrace that little moment because it's in all of those ways where you identify these little patterns, you intercept them, and you choose to make a change to how you're conditioned to behave in that moment. If you do that consistently enough and you keep practicing it, and you keep it up every day, then you're developing a new internal narrative through all those little actions, and it accumulates in ways that are pretty powerful. 

(00:55:43):
Every now and then, there's things that you can do that are more of a brute force method of driving that home. Some may find it through a Vipassana retreat, a seven to 10-day silent retreat, which is agonizing if folks haven't tried to be that quiet that long. Things bubble up, you confront the stuff in your mind that in our day-to-day, it's easy to just keep it under the hood. Some find that through psychedelics. Some find that through somewhat extreme physical feats. 

(00:56:22):
There was a period in time where I didn't realize this at the time, but not only was I building my career, but I was running ultra marathons. Looking back at that I was like, "Yeah, there I was, another desperate attempt to feel worthy," but I also recognize now that that was medicine for me, that me going out onto a remote mountain range for five hours every Saturday and just running well beyond the point of discomfort was consistently cathartic for me. I would cry at the end of almost every single one of those runs. So it's just a recap. It's in those little moments and sometimes in those big moments too, but it begins with the awareness based on truth and then the daily practice.

Lenny (00:57:17):
How long does this process often take for people that you've worked with?

Andy Johns (00:57:21):
There are some famous figures that you can turn to. For example, Eckhart Tolle. He wrote The Power of Now, which he's probably most famous for. He's a great Western spiritual teacher of Eastern traditions. He went through immense suffering himself. Actually, the suffering was so great that for him it led to a somewhat sudden and spontaneous collapse of his sense of identity. Doctors would probably say psychosis, and what he actually had was a spiritual liberation, liberation from his mind, but he describes it himself. In reading his book and listening to some of his lectures and talking about his own journey, he wrote this at, I think, in the first chapter or the preface of The Power of Now when he described the suffering that he was experiencing and the sudden collapse of this sense of identity, and then waking up the next day and feeling this deep sense of peace and freedom for the first time in his life.

(00:58:28):
Then his journey continued to unfold. He eventually started to research to try and understand, "What had just happened to me? What experience did I have?" and dot, dot, dot. Seven years later, he woke up one day and realized he was now a spiritual teacher, seven years. It's not that the journey had ended, but to use a metaphor of two mountains and a valley, that first mountain in his life when he got off of that mountain and he entered this valley, between the first mountain of life and the second mountain of life, the valley that he was in that sat between the old sense of self and then this new sense of self as a spiritual teacher, that valley was seven years for him. 

(00:59:22):
There are many other examples I can pull up like that, including Siddhartha Gautama, Lord Buddha himself. That wasn't a couple weeks or a couple of months, his journey towards liberation from his own mind. If I can recall, that was also a seven or eight-year journey. So these big shifts on a cosmic universal scale, it's instantaneous, right? On the scale of-

Lenny (00:59:50):
[inaudible 00:59:50] context.

Andy Johns (00:59:50):
Yeah. On the scale of 13 billion years, it's instant, but from our perspective, it's not. It feels a lot longer than that.

Lenny (01:00:00):
I want to close the loop on these four steps that you shared, and the one we haven't talked about yet is the last one, which is building compassion towards others. How do you go about that just broadly? I know we're not going to solve that problem for people in the podcast.

Andy Johns (01:00:14):
For me, my experience was that it happened automatically. When you do the first three, it is the result. It's the thing that comes out of step number three itself because, again, when you dig deep enough and you keep searching for the truth, you're like Captain Ahab going down with the white whale in Moby Dick. That is what that book is about. It's not about a fisherman going after a whale. This is the author himself through a story talking about his own journey of emotional and spiritual liberation. 

(01:00:57):
There are many people that would, experts and historians that might disagree with that, and I would disagree with them that it's a story of seeking the truth at all costs to liberate oneself, including being willing to die for that whale, metaphorically, because at the end of the book, they don't really reveal. Did Ahab actually go down with the whale and never come back? Maybe he did, maybe he didn't. 

(01:01:27):
So when you have suffered enough and the search for the truth becomes the only thing that matters and that truth leads you to understanding that, "It's okay. I can accept myself for who I am and it's not all my fault," when that has been done in earnest and when you feel those moments of love for yourself, it suddenly changes how you see everybody else. For me, step four was the easiest because it just happened. It happened after eight years, nine years of my own on and off mental health journey, but it finally happened.

Lenny (01:02:19):
People who are listening to this say they're a VP of Product and they're like, "I don't want to become a spiritual teacher. I want to stay on this path. I want to have a successful career. I want to continue to make a bunch of money." How often do you find there's a path to stay on that path with a rejiggering of how you see the world or does it, if you're suffering enough, does it almost always lead to something completely different in your experience?

Andy Johns (01:02:46):
Again, it's a spectrum. What I've experienced is that the vast majority of people who feel some tug to undergo a process of change, I'd say 90%, 95% of the time pretty confidently I can say that those changes are more of the micro transitions. It's, "Okay. Let me change my job. Let me downsize my house. Let me break up with my partner." Still hard things, and for them, that may be all that is needed and necessary. There's no moral judgment on my side about everyone's got to dive into the deep end. That's certainly not the case, and I'm not advocating for it. I honestly don't even know if it's a choice. There's a part of me that, based on some of the experiences I've had, believes that it was somewhat preordained and that this was going to happen for me, but it's in the minority of cases where the radical transformation of one's sense of identity takes place. It's not common. My general sense is it's definitely less than 1% of the population, and I suspect that's just the way things are.

Lenny (01:04:11):
One of those ends up being Buddha, and one of those ends up being Andy Johns.

Andy Johns (01:04:16):
Yeah, or another popular figure in Western spirituality is Pema Chödrön, who she's got a lot of great books. One of them is titled When Things Fall Apart, some of the first books I read when things fell apart for me. Her story, actually, she used to live in Berkeley, I think, but an American woman. She was married. First marriage didn't work out. She got married again. Second one didn't work out. It ended in somewhat sudden and expected and catastrophic fashion. Here she is with a few children and a broken heart again and deep emotional suffering, and that suffering was so great that it led her to ultimately say, "I must pursue these teachings and this spiritual tradition that I'm starting to wake up to in the Eastern traditions," with Buddhism in particular because she had suffered so much that she needed to find liberation from that.

(01:05:25):
In her case, that even meant separating, not all the time, but a significant portion of her time away from her own children who, if I recall correctly, were early teens timeframe. Now, I think that Pema Chödrön is the only female Buddhist nun in all of North America and is a very well-known spiritual teacher. I also think her journey was somewhere around seven or eight years. Again, that's just the valley between two mountains. Truthfully, the journey continues for the rest of your life, but just another example I wanted to share.

Lenny (01:06:06):
There's some obvious reasons why going down this path is difficult, why making change is hard. What else would you say holds people back from making a big change in their life, and maybe on the flip side is just how do you allow change to happen?

Andy Johns (01:06:20):
A significant thing that holds people back from change is the inertia of civilization because we all experience a fundamental conflict in our life because when we're born, we have many needs, but there are two substantial needs that are immutable in everyone, especially children. The first need is the need for love, acceptance, and connection for mammals. We have one of the longest gestation periods of the entire animal kingdom, and even when we're born, we're helpless, we can't survive. We need nurturing for many, many more years afterwards in order to survive. 

(01:07:13):
That goes hand-in-hand with our need for connection. So we're biologically hardwired to need to be accepted and connected because it is perhaps the most essential thing to survival, more essential than water. So we're born with that need. Yet at the same time, we're also born as unique individuals. 

(01:07:37):
I read a study where the scientists estimated the probability that two sperm or two egg would be genetically identical. For context, I think the average man generates in their prime somewhere around between 10 to 100 million sperm a day. So we generate a lot of sperm in our lifetime. The math that they came up with was that the probability of two sperm being identical is roughly 10 to the 15th power, which is a million times greater than the number of stars in the Milky Way galaxy. There's somewhere between 100 to 400 billion stars in the galaxy. So it's a million times greater than that. So all that is to say is when you were born, you were unique. There's never been a you before ever, and it's going to be a really, really long time or another dimension before another one of you shows up again. 

(01:08:32):
Then further through the socialization of life, we all have unique experiences, and those experiences are passed through this unique prism of our own mind and genetics to where we're further accentuated as individuals. So we're born with this fundamental need to be connected and to be loved, but we're also born with this need to be ourselves and to express ourselves. What ends up happening though is the world that you're born into eventually conditions you away from the unique individual that you were, and that is the function of society. 

(01:09:09):
Society operates because enough people choose to agree on the same beliefs and ideas around the style of education, of raising children, of city planning, of millions of things. So the substrate of society or the adhesive of it is shared belief. So that's why I say the inertia of civilization or I should have said the inertia of society is because you're born into a world that begins to condition you at a very early age to act a certain way and not act a certain way, believe some things and don't believe others. 

(01:09:48):
Why am I a San Francisco Giants fan? Well, because I grew up in a Giants family. It's not like I was two years old and I picked the Giants. It doesn't work that way. What ends up happening then is, and this begins, again, really young. You're two, three, four, five years old and the world around you, namely the adults in the world, start telling you who to be, and it begins to challenge or run into conflict with that individuality, but because our fear of not being accepted and loved is so great that what do we end up doing? We choose to push down our individuality in exchange for being accepted by the pack, beginning with our parents, and then our friends, and then our teachers, and then our bosses, and all of the other dimensions of society. 

(01:10:42):
So we lose who we were before the world told us who to be. It's actually a Carl Jung quote, "The world will ask you who you are, and if you don't know, it'll tell you." So I would say that that is the number one reason why transformation doesn't take place. It's because a long time ago, we made that exchange to forego our individuality in order to be accepted by others because of that deep primal need for love and acceptance. In order to undertake that process of personal transformation, one of the truths you have to realize is that truth, that truth that you are in large part the way you are but because of what the world told you to be, and it's making the choice consciously to then say, "Fuck that, and I'm going to go against the grain and I'm going to now tell the world that I don't want its influence on me anymore, and I will, like Moby Dick or like Ahab going down with the white whale, I am willing to die to return to my individuality and to break free and to be who I want to be in the face of the currents around us regarding the messages around how we should think, live, act, and feel." 

(01:12:11):
So that is the thing that prevents transformation. The simple thing is you could say fear, but what is the fear? That is the fear. It's to say, "I'm going to walk my own path now and I'm going to be who I want to be, and I'm going to discover who I was before the world told me who to be, and by doing so, I run the risk that I'm not going to be accepted anymore." That's terrifying.

Lenny (01:12:44):
Because it's so terrifying, I imagine that's why the suffering is so important to really feel that because, otherwise, why would you go down that path? It feels very hard.

Andy Johns (01:12:57):
Yeah, and that gets to my point earlier around I'm not entirely convinced that this is an act of free will on my part. There have been moments of me intervening and acting with free will, but I believe that there are also undercurrents that would fall into the realm of superstition for a lot of folks that this is the path that was laid out in front of me even before I was born.

Lenny (01:13:29):
Along those same lines, you wrote in one of your writings that at the end of the day, you're on your own to find what ends up alleviating your psychological suffering. Can you speak to that?

Andy Johns (01:13:41):
Yeah. That really ties in with this point of the uniqueness of people. You have to find what works for you. For some people, it's going to be the ice bath thing. For others it's not. Last year, a quick anecdote, I spent a month working at an animal sanctuary in northern Thailand for abused animals and neglected animals. This place is amazing. They take in anything and they say, "We'll find a way," and that's what they do. So they have hundreds and hundreds of animals, including a large herd of elephants, which is pretty amazing. 

(01:14:24):
There was a worker there who I met, and just by the expression on his face, I could tell that this was a liberated man. This was somebody who had figured out something that was contributing to his deep sense of peace. So I went to talk with him. I said, "Hey, something tells me that you figured out the secret to life and I'd like to chat." So we talked, and it turned out that half the time he was a farmer, he had a small little farm, an acre up on a hill in the mountains, and he'd work at his farm half the time and the other half he would then go and work at the animal sanctuary, and he was a practicing Buddhist. 

(01:15:15):
One of the things he said to me really stood out. He used a simple analogy. He said, "Everyone's trying to make it to Bangkok. The problem is they're getting to Bangkok by following somebody else's road. The whole point is to find your own path to Bangkok." He was making that same point or a similar point of you've got to find your own way. That is the message. For me, I take that as maybe the most fundamental message in looking back at the story of the original Buddha himself was, sure, the teachings, the traditions, everything that's formed around his teachings has power and merit to it, but I look at what he did. He was born as a prince into a royal family. Something wasn't right, and he was seeking the truth behind this anguish and this unfulfillment, and there was something inside of him that said, "I must seek the answer because growing up in this sheltered life as a prince, this can't be the answer." 

(01:16:31):
So he left it all behind, including his wife and child, and then he lived as an aesthetic for years, nearly dying close to starvation. He did that for years. Then eventually he realized, "Well, that's not the answer either." Then he famously made his way to the Bodhi tree and sat under it and meditated for 40, 41 days. I can't recall what it was, a long time. Then he had his enlightenment, and out of that came one of the teachings, which is known as the middle way. It's not about being a prince, it's not about being poor. There's something in between. He found that was his path to Bangkok. You could walk that path and maybe it'll teach you something or it'll lead you nowhere because it's not your own path. I think that's the point.

Lenny (01:17:32):
Andy, what a beautiful way to wrap up our conversation. Before we do, is there anything else you want to share that you want to leave listeners with? Then also, I'm just curious how you're doing these days.

Andy Johns (01:17:44):
Sure, sure. Well, let me answer the first one, a message to leave to folks. I would imagine that there's a lot of high performers, successful folks out there. Some of you, you may feel like you're on the verge of answering a call towards a new chapter in life or towards finding a way out of whatever situation you're in that you don't want to be in anymore. The thing I guess I would say to you is that having undergone some change myself, all I can promise you is that it's going to be in some ways the best thing that's ever happened to you, but also the worst thing that's ever happened to you, but those are the experiences that define a life. 

(01:18:36):
If you feel that call inside of you to seek a new way of living, just know that you're not the only one out there doing it. There are others out there such as myself and that I can always be reached. So I wish you a happy journey and just know that things are going to be okay. Now, the second question, what am I up to nowadays? Is that-

Lenny (01:19:03):
How are you doing? How are you doing on this journey?

Andy Johns (01:19:06):
I'm good. I still have my ups and downs. I've arrived at an interesting part in my journey where it's something that I'm practicing now and I still don't quite have the hang of it. I'll use one more metaphor. I think the way that I approached the first part of my life was as if life was a big mountain to be climbed, where you're trying to head up Everest under this assumption that once you get to the top, you're going to have this bliss that will persist or that will make you feel that you had a life well-lived, and that that was the answer, but what I experienced was that once I got to the top of one mountain, then I had to find the top of another and another and another. Although you see and do some amazing things along the way, at some point it's too exhausting. At some point, you may really get yourself into trouble and you might not survive. 

(01:20:13):
The vast majority of people who die on Mount Everest actually die on the way down, not on the way up. You don't save anything for the return home, I think is the point. Instead of pursuing my life now as a mountain to be climbed in the hopes that reaching the top will make me feel good again, I'm instead trying to float down river. So for example, if you go whitewater rafting, they'll give you a little safety crash course at the beginning. They'll say, "Here's how you paddle. Put your vest on." One of the things they'll ask you is, what do I do if I fall overboard, especially if I fall overboard into the rapids or the cold water? This is maybe the most important thing they teach because commonly what happens if you're in sizable enough rapids and you fall overboard, the tendency is to freak out and to fight the current. When people freak out in the water, especially when the water's choppy, that's when they get in trouble. 

(01:21:20):
The thing they teach you to do is instead you go into mummy mode, right? You lay back, you cross your arms across your chest, and you stick your feet out like you're a mummy, and you do the opposite of fighting the current. You allow the current to take you where it's trying to take you. For me, I actually find that I believe that that's a more fitting metaphor for life. It's possible that there's something amazing for us downstream so long as we're willing to surrender and just let go, to turn off the intellectual mind a bit, to quit trying to plan as if you can predict the future, to quit thinking about all the edge cases and trying to optimize our life, which I think is a bunch of bullshit. It's possible that if you just relax and you instead pay attention to the signals around you, you feel where the current is trying to take you, maybe towards a potential life partner, maybe away from an oppressive work environment, maybe towards a place to live that is more calm and peaceful, whatever it may be. 

(01:22:33):
If you really tune in with yourself and pay attention to that current and you relax into it, you'll arrive at a destination that you were meant for. In a sense, that's what I did that has brought me to this conversation today. Instead of talking about investing in companies and what have you, I'm instead trying to connect with people on an entirely different level and help them make their own way downstream, so to speak. 

(01:23:11):
So for me nowadays, that's how I'm living at the moment. I'm actually in Vietnam. Just got here about 10 days ago because it seemed like the current of life was taking me here right now. It's likely that it's just the next lily pad towards wherever else I'm heading to, but I guess I'm in the mindset now where I'm willing to just surrender and see how it unfolds.

Lenny (01:23:35):
The metaphor for that is they lost your luggage on the way to Vietnam, and we had to push back this recording a week.

Andy Johns (01:23:41):
Yeah, that's right, that's right. My luggage was half a world away from me, and so when that happened, what could I do? I just said, "Okay. Well, I have shorts and a shirt on me that I can wear for the next three or four days," and that's what I did.

Lenny (01:24:00):
Amazing. Andy, I think this might end up being one of the most meaningful episodes of the podcast. I think it's going to end up being a Trojan horse for people are coming here for advice on optimizing their product and growth, and they'll opt up rethinking their whole life, hopefully in a good way, maybe cause some suffering, maybe help people through suffering. Thank you, Andy, so much for being here. Two final questions. You said people could reach out if they're going down this path and maybe need some help or advice. So what's the best way for people to reach out, and then how can listeners be useful to you?

Andy Johns (01:24:31):
Sure, a couple ways. You can find me on Twitter, my username is Clues Dot Life, so C-L-U-E-S-D-O-T-L-I-F-E. You can also find me on LinkedIn, search for Andrew Johns, you'll find me on there. You can check out my website Clues.Life. It's a basic MVP, but it's an art project that's in process. So those are a couple of ways that you can reach out. In terms of ways you can help, you can't always tell who you're helping. When I sit behind my laptop and I write and I send my messages out into the world, other than getting some thumbs up here and there, you don't always know what impact you're having. 

(01:25:22):
Sometimes it's good to hear because, again, for me, this is part of me rewriting that internal narrative where I'm trying to do more work for the benefit of others as opposed to what it does for my bank account. So if part of this message has been beneficial to you, it would certainly put wind in my sails to hear that. So that would be one way to help.

Lenny (01:25:50):
What a great answer. So let's blow up the YouTube comments and send you some DMs and LinkedIn messages if people find this valuable. Andy, thank you again so much for being here.

Andy Johns (01:26:02):
Lenny, I appreciate it, man. Thank you.

Lenny (01:26:04):
Bye, everyone. 

(01:26:07):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Anuj Rathi (00:00:00):
There are only three reasons why things do not happen the way you want them to happen as a leader. You can look at a person, and you would say either that person can't do, which is a capability issue, or they won't do, which is a motivation or an alignment issue, or they were not set up to do, which is really your problem that you didn't set up the ways of working now design properly. So, as a leader, do you have the right people in terms of capability? If not, is the right answer for us to coach them or to really put them... or mentor them and so on, or move them to some other place because maybe their capability is suited elsewhere? If they won't do, why won't they? Are they not aligned to you? Do they not agree with your vision? Do they not just have enough time? So on and so forth. So you need to really go deeper there. Why won't they do?

Lenny (00:00:50):
Today, my guest is Anuj Rathi. I've been looking to get more India-based product leaders on the podcast because this podcast has a large audience in India. When I put out a call on Twitter and LinkedIn asking people who I should have on, Anuj was the single most requested person. Anuj is Chief Product and Marketing Officer at Jupiter Money. Previously, he was Senior Vice President of Revenue and Growth at Swiggy where he spent seven years. He was also VP of Product at Snapdeal, a Senior PM at Walmart Labs, and the very first Product Manager at Flipkart where he led the buyer experience team.

(00:01:24):
In our conversation, we dig into how product management is different in India, Anuj's lessons about building product experiences for new users, how he operationalized the working backwards process at the companies he's worked at, why he pushes his teams to explore three divergent directions before settling on a plan, why he thinks product managers and companies should be much more full stack than they are. Also, a bunch of frameworks and contrarian takes about building product and your career in product. A big thank you to Sayan Maiti and Nikhil Kulkarni for helping me navigate the product scene in India. Look for more amazing India-based product leaders to come. With that, I bring you Anuj Rathi after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:08):
This episode is brought to you by Sanity. Your website is the heart of your growth engine. For that engine to drive big results, you need to be able to move super fast, ship new content, experiment, learn, and iterate, but most content management systems just aren't built for this. Your content teams wrestle with rigid interfaces as they build new pages. You spend endless time copying and pasting across pages and recreating content for other channels and applications, and their ideas for new experiments are squashed when developers can't build them within the constraints of outdated tech.

(00:02:39):
Forward-thinking companies like Figma, Amplitude, Loom, Riot Games, Linear, and more use Sanity to build content growth engines that scale, drive innovation, and accelerate customer acquisition. With Sanity, your team can dream bigger and move faster. As the most powerful headless CMS on the market, you can tailor editorial workflows to match your business, reuse content seamlessly across any page or channel, and bring your ideas to market without developer friction. Sanity makes life better for your whole team. It's fast for developers to build with, intuitive for content managers, and it integrates seamlessly with the rest of your tech stack. Get started with Sanity's generous free plan, and as a Lenny's Podcast listener, you can get a boosted plan with double the monthly usage. Head over to sanity.io/lenny to get started for free. That's sanity.io/lenny.

(00:03:30):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, Com, Quora, and Modern Treasury trust Vanta to help build, scale, manage, and demonstrate their security and compliance programs, and get ready for audits in weeks, not months. By offering the most in-demand, security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, and many more, Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders. Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts, Get started today.

(00:04:31):
Anuj, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Anuj Rathi (00:04:34):
Thank you so much, Lenny. Thank you for having me.

Lenny (00:04:37):
It's my pleasure. I haven't told you this, but when I put a call out on Twitter and LinkedIn for people's favorite India-based product leaders, you are the single most recommended person, and so I just wanted to start with how does it feel to be the most loved India-based product leader at least according to my Twitter followers and LinkedIn followers?

Anuj Rathi (00:04:58):
Well, it feels really good, and I really feel it's come together because I've been doing product management for the longest time. In 2010, when I started the product management journey with Flipkart. I think that that was a time when there were not a lot of products being built for India. So I think one part is just the tenure, and B, I think it's just a lot of people have known the work.

Lenny (00:05:20):
Awesome. You're very modest. I wanted to start with a question about product in India, and I'm just curious just how is product management and product building in general just most different in India?

Anuj Rathi (00:05:33):
Yeah. I think that's a very interesting question, and I think about this all the time. When I look at product management in India, and I do have a lot of friends comparing product management versus in US or even in Europe versus even in China, Southeast Asia, et cetera. I think India has had a very interesting journey of products in general and hence, product management also. I think till about 2010-ish, there were not really many products built for the Indian consumers in the first place. There were a lot of products being built, a lot of technology being built, but largely, because it was a back office, so you had a lot of great engineers working in companies which would build products for the American customer or even for the European customer and so on. So once these startups started coming in, which were thinking about building for the Indian consumers, I think we did not really have that talent which we could directly tap into. We're trained into product building. Forget product management as a field in the first place. There were no colleges which were teaching anything about this. There was no playbooks, and so on, and so forth. We would go to the internet, and look at YouTube, and look at SVPG and all of that, but what we would understand would not... you could not put directly to the Indian startups.

(00:06:48):
The way that they shaped up I think also shaped up the way product management field would evolve in India. So it's taken a bunch of iterations, and I think there are two or three different waves that have come in, and we are way closer to how good product management should be done in India. We still have a little bit way to go compared to, say, US. I also think of it along... For example, in US, the product building culture probably started in 1970s, the modern software product building culture, and you didn't only have product manager, but the entire ecosystem... If you think about a company, who is the VP of business, and who is the VP of supply, and sales, and ops, and technology, and all of that? That group knew how to work with each other to build software products. They understood how that would be built and what to expect.

(00:07:37):
I think in India, when we were in 2010, et cetera, even those different people who needed to come together to build, say, e-commerce, they would come from, say, FMCG, or they would come from manufacturing and so on. What they would have seen in their journeys in terms of what we expect is a very request response kind of understanding which is, "Here's machinery. If I give this X resources, I expect, with a little bit of variability, why predictable output will come," and that mentality also moved on to what I expect from product managers or product building journeys and so on. So I think over a period of time, a lot of those cycles have happened, and a lot more other leaders in companies have now seen those cycles and understood, "All right. Now, I understand software is not machinery. Consumers are not predictable as much as we thought." That has led to, now, finally, I think, product management coming of age.

Lenny (00:08:34):
You said that, I guess, in the Bay Area, things started 1970s, something like that. When would you say things started to really ramp up in modern product thinking in India?

Anuj Rathi (00:08:43):
I think 2010 was when it started because... Look, there were a few products that were built before that also, and I think somebody said this clearly that usually, when modern consumer internet starts coming in countries, it usually starts with travel, so you do have... Basically, any country, we would start with, usually, the first travel company. So I think India started with some companies like MakeMyTrip and so on way earlier. There were a few very interesting products being built in India which were solving uniquely for the Indian consumers that were in the matrimony side which is Shaadi.com, and Bharmatrimony.com, and so on. We're like, "What do you think about Tinder?" India is famous for arranged marriages, so a product that would really understand that, "Hey, if you're a parent, if you want to get your kid up for matrimony, how would you solve for them?" and that marketplace of matchmaking, et cetera started.

(00:09:34):
So a few blips here and there which was following uniquely for India. I think 2010 was a decade or time when I can very clearly imagine that's where a lot of people started building for India. So I think, again, Flipkart started that kind of journey, but in a couple of years, then they were like, say, Ola which was, in a way, similar to Uber, what they were doing elsewhere, and then a whole bunch of other startups that started coming in. So, for example, in food delivery, when I was working at Swiggy, that came in like, say, 2015, 2014, in that timeframe. Now, you see a whole bunch of startups which are trying to do not only things which are... what could an Uber for India look like or what could a DoorDash for India look like. Very different and also, very innovative. So I think now is the time when you see a lot more product building around that area.

Lenny (00:10:24):
Where are some numbers of just like companies in India, people in India's money spent in India? I don't know. Things that would be like, "Wow, that is a much bigger opportunity than I thought."

Anuj Rathi (00:10:33):
Okay. This is a very wide question, so I'll tell you. Before the opportunity in India, I think I'll talk about the complexity in India which I think a lot of people don't understand. India has what? 1.4 billion people. So there were three waves, really, that happened in India, but also, in the globe. I think first wave was from desktop to mobile, and then even from mobile to smartphones. From smartphones, there was what we call the Jio revolution. There's an Indian company called Reliance Jio that basically got internet at the cheapest prices for smartphones. So because of this, a whole population came onto the internet which was hungry for newer products, newer content, completely different ways of interacting with each other, and using internet for all sorts of different things. That was one of the waves.

(00:11:24):
The other part is really what the Indian government really enabled which is... especially in digitization of a bunch of absolute core fundamental citizen-related machinery which is either through digital payments, which is a whole bunch of Indians now started having a bank account by default, and something called UPI. So even if you do not have a bank account or that bank account is linked to your mobile phone number, but now everybody would pay through that, and that brought in a very different kind of revolution. So even if 5 rupees, that is basically 10 cents or less than that, that would be paid through UPI, and people started moving away from cash and so on. There's something called the India Stack that is all of these things coming together, which is social security, identity, payments, and so on, that a whole bunch of other apps can now use to build their own layers on top of that. So many interesting cases started coming about. So that's one which is just a number and the infrastructure.

(00:12:25):
Now, the other thing to look at is India is very diverse, so the number of languages spoken here, even the official languages is so high, and they say... There's an elders' quote in India like, "Every 15 miles, the language will change, and the people and the culture will change, and it's a huge country of so many people." So your traditional ways of thinking about products also, the "Who I'm building for?" is very different. "Are you building for this person or that?" Et cetera. So a bunch of frameworks break down because it's not even that the same language will apply. While English is a language that is used by the people at least who have the money and who have the dollar to even give to you, but you have to think way more widely.

(00:13:06):
The other thing about India that is interesting is the price that people are willing to pay. Generally, it does look at the per capita money that people have. It is very low. It's in the two, two and a half thousand dollar range compared to US which is maybe 30 times more and so on. So while there's a lot of people who are going to give you traffic, and engagement, and so on, but the craft of actually choosing the right kind of paying customer who will actually come, and engage, and give you money is at a premium. So a lot harder work needs to be done. If you're running e-commerce, who are the people who will pay me delivery fee? Who are the people who will actually buy this expensive stuff? So a whole bunch of different ways of thinking has evolved in this country, and that's why it's so vibrant and so different than any other global products.

Lenny (00:14:01):
Wow. Fascinating. I could keep going, but I want to talk product. I've collected a bunch of questions from people that know you or people that have worked with you about a bunch of different stuff, so I'm just going to go a little bit all over the place. The first area I wanted to talk about is the user experience. Apparently, you have a interesting insight and a different approach of thinking about new users and new user experiences.

Anuj Rathi (00:14:24):
One of the things that I realized once we started working with the products is that product managers and generally, companies are too engrossed in thinking about... because they are very close to the product. It's close to their heart, and they're looking at it all the time. They're looking at a lot of minor nuances in terms of how this works and feels, and almost inherent into this is the bias that everybody is thinking about this product all day, all the time, and so on, and so forth. Whereas the reality is most consumers in the country or in your target market, they don't care, and they may have sometime heard about your product. The word of mouth is not ever so strong, even if you're the strongest brand, and so on, and so forth, but that is the customer that you've got to bring in, and then serve.

(00:15:07):
So there's very interesting insight that I heard from Scott Belsky from Adobe, and then now, he's doing very interesting stuff, and that stayed with me which was you have to think about users on modern internet consumers having three attributes. So they are lazy, they are vain, and they're selfish. So lazy meaning, "I don't have time for this, so blow my mind away. Otherwise, I'm not going to pay attention." Vain which means, "I have a habit. I'm solving this problem in a particular way, and here, you come with your two-pack product and ask me to change my habit. Do you really expect me to do that?" That's second. That's their inherent attribute. The third one is that they're selfish like, "Show me what's in it for me."

(00:15:52):
Once you start thinking about users in that vein, and if these users are not even using your product, suddenly, you realize, "Oh my god, it's quite difficult even... How do I attract this kind of customer, and if my marketing team has done a good job at bringing this user to my product, how do I actually now empathize with this lazy, selfish, and vain customer, and build my product in a way so that I can make this appear on your site like this is the thing that you have to use, the way you write your copy, the way you build your onboarding, the way you do your first warm welcome?" It's going to make the biggest amount of change in terms of a product success, then your core product features that you're going to build for your loyal consumers.

(00:16:37):
So that one insight, and I've seen and applied that multiple times not only the companies that I worked with, the companies I've consulted and spoken with. Most neglect it. Well, they get user onboarding is important, but just how important is that is one, and B, the craft of thinking like a user who's lazy, vain, and selfish, and basically, rejecting all your products, but this does not work for this kind of customer. It's extremely hard. It's very hard, but it's totally worth it if you put that lens on.

Lenny (00:17:06):
Is there an example of you using this framework on a product you worked on where you're just like, "Here's a thing we really did..." I don't know, had a big impact or really surprised everyone?

Anuj Rathi (00:17:16):
So we used it in two different areas. So one is, of course, products I worked on. So I worked in Swiggy for the last seven years, and really, when we started working towards this user, instead of thinking about everybody as, "This is what our onboarding experience looks like, and this is what our product is." So, essentially, we used, basically, say, a key that it's... "We are a food delivery app. We are a grocery delivery app, and we have these bunch of things." Instead of that, we just started reframing it from the point of view of, "What would you want, and how could you use us? What is it in it for you?" and we started connecting all our marketing messages along with the onboarding. So even going out market and thinking, "Where do you actually find us? How did you know about us? It's a reasonably large brand. Why have you not already downloaded us and used us? Have you used us and rejected us in the past?" So building that entire mental model and looking at a user from the point of view of, "Let's assume that you have heard about us 20 times. What was that exact situation that brought you to download this app?"

(00:18:20):
So right from the entire journey of you hearing us, what was the trigger, and what was the marketing message, and what was the promotion that we were running? How do we continue that journey on your onboarding from your splash, that 200 rupees of... X rupees if you buy from us, continuing that entire journey in the language that they understand and with the user experience that is continuation from the marketing to product, other thing that we started focusing on a lot more, and it instantly started showing us results. But while I'm talking about just a very simple example and everybody should be doing it, that is true even when you have a particular app which has multiple products and many product lines. It's the same principle that applies there, and that's where I think the largest amount of delta that happens that people don't know really why are we not able to cross-pollinate or cross-sell, and so on, and so forth.

(00:19:14):
Right now, I'm working with a company called Jupiter which is a financial services app, and it's a neobank. So we care for personal finance, and it has a bunch of offerings. There's a personal account or savings account. There's a credit card. There's mutual funds. There is investments in, say, gold, and FD, and so on, and so forth. It's a bunch of things. But when people think about why using us only for one service and just go away, actually, the key is to recognize that this user has found value in... They are not interested in all the other things that you talked about, so be able to empathize with that user, and now thinking about the behavioral science aspects in terms of, "How do I convert this user from one to the other?" That I think is extremely important.

Lenny (00:20:00):
So a couple things I'm hearing here. One is the importance of focusing on not people currently using your product, but this idea of maybe the marginal user or the adjacent user, the next state of users is who you should be thinking about when you're trying to optimize onboarding the user experience, and then two is... Something that sounds like you've had a lot of success with is picking one value prop, maybe one positioning statement, and then following that through their entire journey versus like, "Here's all the things we do." Is that right?

Anuj Rathi (00:20:31):
That's absolutely right. Let me give an example of this one. One of the reasons why I really feel product managers must, if not better, but equally understand, category consumers which are not in market or which are not really buying your products just yet. As good as the marketer or the brand expert in your team does... because they really are tasked with, "What is that one message that I can say that will make the user take attention or get to like, 'Oh, this is interesting,' and direct attention towards your product?" If the product managers are able to do that, then they will choose that positioning and essentially, understand, "What is my hope product, and what is the hope that..." At least get them to try my app or any of those things, right? So if they understand it as well as the marketer, and then understand, "Over a period of time, what is the right time when I introduce them to this other one rather than being very greedy about letting the new user try everything?" So that's one.

(00:21:37):
The other thing that I feel a lot of product managers don't do right is... "Forget about everything. Here's my app. Go figure," is how most of the products are designed unfortunately. Automatically, these things will happen without any intervention. I have created something which is so beautiful, and once you tap that icon, everyone can say, "That is my product that is so working perfectly," but they don't really think about, "At what moment do I actually get this user here, and will they use it?" Well, this user is lazy, vain, and selfish.

Lenny (00:22:09):
That phrase reminds me of something I always think about. Marc Andreessen had this great quote that your user's time is already allocated. They're not looking for more apps to download. They already have a plan for the day. Basically, they have things to do. They're not like, "Hmm, what's another iPhone app I'm going to check out right now?" So somehow you have to convince them, "This is worth your time," and I like this framework. Is there an example of a phrase you found really effective either at Swiggy, or Jupiter, or Flipkart, or anything just like, "Here's a really quick example of something that had a big impact on either simplifying the value prop," or if you don't have an example top of mind, what was the impact you saw from implementing some of these ideas?

Anuj Rathi (00:22:48):
I'll talk about a phrase that I now use with product managers a lot to simplify how they should be thinking. I think one thing is... and that's not only for the consumers, but even how we operate. We are product managers, and we are in the business of influence. Users are doing something, and now we want them to do something else. Our engineers are doing something, and now we want to influence them into building something fast. Really, leadership has some plans. We'll influence them to, essentially, look at a plan, and basically, sign off, and do something else. We are in the business of influence, and you are doing this all the time internally. Otherwise, you're not successful even in shipping. Now, we have to extend this to our users and really think about it from that point of view. So you are a full-stack influencer and not only an external influencer. So we've got to think more like sales, more like marketing, more like influencers.

Lenny (00:23:42):
One of the most important skills for a product manager is influencing people on team, and I like the point that you're also trying to influence your user. That's interesting. Just more reason to get really good at influence, so. I actually have a newsletter about how to get better influence based on Frodo Baggins and Lord of the Rings. We'll link to that in the show notes. Okay. Let's shift to a different topic. You have a really concrete way of actually implementing the working backwards process. We had one of the authors of the book Working Backwards on recently, and I'm excited to just hear what you've learned about how to actually put this into practice. It's easy to hear about, "Let's work backwards," but doing it is a different beast, and so I'd love to hear what you've learned there.

Anuj Rathi (00:24:20):
So I think the people who invented working backwards is clearly Amazon. I think they started this entire process which are like, "Hey, why don't you write a press release, and with that press release, we'll work backwards from that one?" I thought that was a very cool idea, and I was trying to dig down into like, "Hey, why does it work?" My insight or at least the way that I thought about this one is it's not working backwards only from a customer value proposition. "Will our customers love it, and will they pay for it? Is it noteworthy, and is it something that we should even be working?" While that is one of the most important things that the Working Backwards framework teaches us, but essentially, what you're working backwards from is an entire machinery at a particular day that is working for... For the date of GTM, what do we need to do from here till that particular day so that the GTM is successful, but also, what will be the machinery we would have created so that this product is successful?

(00:25:20):
Now, because you're already talking about GTM, you're already thinking about, "How will users love it? What is the money that we'll spend? What are the alternatives that we will... routes that we have explored that finally we have zeroed in on and all of those?" So they are all going to be a part of a PR review. If I take a slightly open stance on this one, what is a press release? A press release is you have a one-pager which talks about what are we building, what is a particular date, what is the exact value proposition, what will consumers say, what will the business manager say, how will they respond, how will they use it. But the one thing that comes out from this framework is that you can use it for a whole bunch of other things. You can use it for negotiation, for example, because you start with a date, and then you say, "This is the one-pager that I need to ship, and I want the consumers to see that." You can use it to now go to our VP Engineering and say, "By this date, can we build all of this?" Now, they do not have all the PRDs and everything, but they can give you a sense that this is too aggressive or this is not and so on.

(00:26:18):
We can also use the quotes here to actually find alliances or find people who are going to actually derail this. So you actually use the customer quote to basically say, "I want my customers to say this. From marketing and from my pricing team, can we actually ship this so that consumers will say that?" Then, from the business owner's quote, you actually say, "This is what we are shipping, but what are your goals? Can you say that within three months, we would have achieved this much?" So using that to build one entire picture is one way that I found it really powerful because if you find disagreements here, then say, "I can't ship it," then you change the date, and then you change the goals because all of these things are changing together. So instead of one, you find the other set of all the things that need to come together for that press release to go live is the real value.

(00:27:07):
The other part that I found interesting here is that I really truly believe in the power of three. So I actually ask my teams to write three press releases, alternative and divergent like, "What if we..." Suppose you're launching a membership program. So, instead of two tiers, let's do three tiers, or for example, let's take another one which is instead of building a membership, let's build up tiering pricing program with membership points. Instead of this segment, let's use another segment. Let's say within these three, and they all need to be fully thought-through, and that helps the leadership choose.

(00:27:44):
So the two things that work here. When you are in the product discovery phase, you would have heard from a lot of folks. Finally, if you show them just one roadmap, it feels like, "Hey, this person didn't..." They listened to my interesting point which was valuable, but didn't include it. But when you're doing this three PR FAQs, I considered this, and this added up to a story that eventually is valuable, this alternative route. I considered your point of view, and I created a story, but unfortunately, it is not adding up so we rejected it. So, now, people can compare and contrast, and that's a very powerful leadership tool. That, actually, is a very powerful tool even for CXOs. When they say, "Let's build this," you'll say, "Here are three ways we can build this, and here's the reason why I'm not building what you said because you would like these two more."

Lenny (00:28:36):
That's a really cool idea of just using the PR FAQ and working backwards process to think very differently partly to make sure you've explored all the options, partly to just think through things that are in the back of people's minds and see if there's something there before committing to the one direction.

Anuj Rathi (00:28:51):
So the FAQs also are very important to set processes in the system. For example, now, at Jupiter, we have a financial services app. So every FAQ will mandatorily have, "How are you going to make sure that it is fully compliant? Have you gotten sign-off from A, B, C people? Have you actually thought about legal aspects, and so on, and so forth?" So, for example, you can use the FAQs very effectively here. Whereas, for example, when it was Swiggy, and it's a three-way marketplace, you have consumers, delivery executives, and restaurant partners. Now, any small change that you do on, say, delivery partners, for example, if you're working on optimizing their earnings per hour which will lead to some changes in cost per delivery, but that may have a completely different impact on delivery fee.

(00:29:31):
I'm just making this up, but now, because of so many moving parts in your FAQs, you're explicitly asking, "Have you thought about what are the implications on restaurant partners? Have you thought about what are implications on delivery partners?" We, in fact, also have that PR FAQ in terms of we write down the different segments of delivery partners, and sometimes it will have extremely weird correlations because those product managers on one side of the equation have started thinking or at least consulting the other part of the marketplace, "What could this mean for you?" It gets everybody together to create very crisp products that work for all sides of the marketplace.

Lenny (00:30:10):
One thread I'm pulling out of a few of your stories so far is you often come back to this full-stack approach to many models. So you talked about how PM is like an influencer, but also, they're influencing users. That's a cool way of thinking about it. With this working backwards process, you can use it to think about the full stack of launch, not just what features you're going to build. I know you also have some strong opinions about product managers, and they should be much more full-stack than most PMs. Does that ring a bell, and if so, can you talk about that?

Anuj Rathi (00:30:39):
Yes. No, I think it is the same thread that is connecting the first and the second. I think product managers have to own outcomes and not only features and parts of the problem. Well, they will own some parts of the problem fully, but if they need to work with everybody to make sure that eventual product that they launch is successful and not only successful from the point of view of, "Hey, we launched something that works for users," et cetera, that's not the definition of success. Did it work in the way that it really changed the behavior of the kind of user that we wanted to achieve a business outcome that will build a capability that is important for us? All of those things combined will not happen if the product manager is only thinking about their part. So they have to think about external users, they have to think about competition, they have to think about other product managers and product leaders about engineering, about marketing, and so on because it's such a diverse field.

(00:31:36):
Unless you really... and I'm not saying you need to be an authority of that. Either you are very, very good at that, or you have built partnerships, and have run your ideas or product through those people and gotten weighted from them, and finally made a decision around that part, I don't think you'll be very successful. So, in my opinion, the full-stack product managers are the ones who are going to be more successful rather than product managers who are doing very good at one particular area only. So there's one book which is Range, right? I'm sure you may have heard about it, right? Even the first chapter, what they talk about is... They take two examples. One is the example of Federer, Roger Federer. So, with Roger Federer, for example, I think I'll just continue that, that till 18, he played a bunch of racket sports, and this wasn't even tennis. But then, you bring in ideas from one racket sport to the other, and second to the third, and so on, and so forth, and now you have such a range of ideas that you can connect a lot more dots and actually ship it. I think that's a better playbook for being more successful in product.

Lenny (00:32:41):
I was just watching a documentary on... I think it was called Greatness and had Wayne Gretzky. He had exactly the same experience actually. When he was young, he played hockey just during the winter times, and during summer, he played other sports. Hockey was just like one sport he played, and then eventually started to focus on it, and they talked about how people that played different sports in their childhood actually ended up being much better at that one sport that they chose. So a lot of parallels. I know you also have a lot of interesting ways of thinking about coming up with a roadmap ideas, and ideating and building a roadmap backlog. So you already talked about this idea of going in very divergent directions and seeing if that leads anywhere. There's a couple more someone shared. One is you have this idea of show don't tell. What is that?

Anuj Rathi (00:33:27):
Actually, show don't tell is an idea which is an extension of what we are talking about from what backwards. When we're talking about working backwards, one is a PR FAQ which is a written documentation of what we are trying to achieve. Show don't tell is essentially a way in where the product manager starts ideating with the entire experience, and they actually create all the collaterals together of a user they need to begin with if you're working on a single-play product which is a single-user product. Then, you actually start bringing together your marketers and others in terms of, "What is literally the first screen, and how is my user getting here?" It's not as simple as he imagines somebody who will be doing this and reaching here. We try to recreate an exact situation.

(00:34:16):
There's a concept of person, not personas. So we'll talk about personas, but we try to go to, "All right. No. Don't think about agentic user. Let's say Lenny, 30 years old, doing A, B, C things, earning this much, et cetera, et cetera. His relationship with this category of food delivery is X. These are the things that he has done in the last month. In the last three days, there were the needs, desires, aspirations, fears, frustrations, et cetera, et cetera." We say, "Okay. It's 11:00. What's happened? Why is this user open, or what triggered this particular app, and then what happened?" So you literally start from there, and I think 50% of my product reviews are on that part, and then when we say, "All right. Then, this app got open. Do we have the right kind of way forward for Lenny to actually achieve what he came here for?" Literally, each pixel, and each copy, and each word is going to be in service of that part.

(00:35:08):
So that's showing the entire journey rather than just staying and assuming. So that is something that I've found really powerful with respect to even designing products or even thinking about why are we building something. What it also helps is when we are building complex products, especially in marketplaces because once you are building this for the user, simultaneously, something is happening on the other part if it is simultaneous, if it's a real-time marketplace, or something like that. So you're building something for the user and saying, "All right. If this guy ordered, now there's a 30 minutes time when our delivery executors will come to the user with food. What is happening? What's the emotional state of the user, and let's plot out the 30 minutes time, and let's create various scenarios. Is it like, 'Hey, maybe he went to the restaurant, and the food is delayed,' or the dude on a bike, his bike got punctured, et cetera. Now, what is the consumer thinking at this time?" So you show all of those things in real time, and that cuts out a whole bunch of random ways in which the product could have looked like if you're creating even a chatbot. So just having that showcase of all journeys coming together helps a lot in building your products in the right way.

Lenny (00:36:19):
So, essentially, just getting very detailed and very concrete with the product experience that you're building thinking about the user experience. Sounds like a lot of work. I can't imagine you do this often. Is the advice here to do this once a year or once and just keep it updated? It sounds like you did this at Swiggy, and that was a really impactful way of building the product.

Anuj Rathi (00:36:41):
Yeah. I think there's not only one way actually. I think I recommend this every product manager to do a show don't tell version of their current version. At the same time, there's a new version all the time. So they can compare and contrast, and very easily explain to everyone why they're doing something. In fact, that wall... So it's called a wall. It also becomes one common place where you can get all the stakeholders in because it becomes... Instead of just doing the elevator pitch, you can actually do detailed discussions on why I'm choosing this versus something else, and so on, and so forth. That's a product manager's version of doing this.

(00:37:10):
There's also a product leader's version of doing this thing which is recycle strategy on a page, and a lot of people call it like growth loops. Right? Don't show our user's journey. Now, let's see the entire strategy of the company together on one page. "All right. This is what the market looks like, and why will we get what kind of users? What is our activation budgets, and how many of them are we going to get to this next stage and get them to use it? How will we get them to cross-pollinate into different sections? Do we need a membership program? Are there any different levers which will press more or less and so on?" So that also is a show don't tell, and not only one, but usually, I like to create three of them as well like, "Why did we choose a strategy versus the other?" That, for example, is a very good way for our product leaders to get to one strategy that their CXOs align with and something that they can essentially tell the entire product and other teams, "This is what we're going to follow."

Lenny (00:38:09):
This episode is brought to you by Wix Studio. Your agency has just landed a dream client, and you already have big ideas for the website, but do you have the tools to bring your ambitious vision to life? Let me tell you about Wix Studio, the new platform that lets agencies deliver exceptional client sites with maximum efficiency. How? First, let's talk about advanced design capabilities. With Wix Studio, you can build unique layouts with a revolutionary grid experience and watch as elements scale proportionally by default. No-code animations add sparks of delight while adding custom CSS gives total design control. Bring ambitious client projects to life with any industry with a fully integrated suite of business solutions from e-commerce to events, bookings, and more, and extend the capabilities even further with hundreds of APIs and integrations. You know what else? The workflows just make sense. There's the built-in AI tools, the on-Canvas collaborating, a centralized workspace, the reuse of assets across sites, the seamless client handover, and that's not all. Find out more at wix.com/studio.

(00:39:14):
What kind of impact have you seen from implementing something like this, or is there an example of something that came out of this that was a big unlock? Again, it's probably a lot of work for someone to put together a whole board, keep it updated, screenshots, marketing, funnels of where people are coming from. What sort of impact do you see from doing this either on growth or people, what people think?

Anuj Rathi (00:39:34):
I think the largest impact that happens here is on alignment, so how CXOs are thinking if that is not very clear, and that can be a document, and so on, and so forth. But for a lot of people, it's not very clear on... I can see one part of the funnel. I can understand... The marketing team can understand the best why we are acquiring those users, but they don't fully see the picture of, "If I attract this kind of users, why will these users become loyal, and what does that entire thing look like or, say, some other team which is building a part of the product? Where do I come in and so on?" So I think the largest impact that the show don't tell has is on, basically, getting the entire company together on the same page and them being able to understand why I'm doing, and which part of the entire picture I am working on, and why others are working on so that I can actually work with them to solve that part. That's one.

(00:40:30):
The other thing that it helps, Lenny, is it also helps in choosing directions, like I said, because we are not doing one, but three of them. I'm choosing one alternative versus the other, and sometimes these strategic discussions, they can get going all sorts of different ways, and maybe you will talk about one particular unique point and go deeper rather than look at the entire picture together and say, "This is good because of all of these five points that we presented in page one versus the other one."

Lenny (00:41:01):
I think the other benefit, just one of the benefits of working backwards in Amazon's whole written-down memo approach is it forces you to crystallize ideas and not stay superficial because there's so many good ideas in theory. But then, when you have to get really concrete, that's actually a terrible idea. Basically, it's the same benefit in a lot of ways of get very concrete. What are you actually going to do? That will help you identify, "Okay. This isn't going to work. What are we even thinking?" So I like that. Awesome. Okay. Another framework that you have is something that you call the four BB framework for product strategy. Can you talk about what that's all about?

Anuj Rathi (00:41:36):
We essentially saw that if a startup actually usually wants to do a bunch of things across the border, there's always like, "Hey, I should be investing in tech debt or building core platforms. That would really help my product in the long term. That's super important," and that's my engineering managers and largely, people asking for that bandwidth. Then, there is the product manager themselves who's basically saying, "I want to do feature enhancement, bug fixes, my version twos, a few areas, experiments, and so on, and so forth." That's a regular product backlog that would work on screen by screen, and there's this leadership which will say, "You know what? Now, we have a suite of products. Now, I want to take a large delta bit that may work. It may not work, but we need to make sure that it works, but I need work across teams, and it's not only one person that needs to do it. I need contribution from four or five of you that come together and deliver that," or there are places where a company is just reimagining their identity, or they're pivoting which is like, "All right. We were doing X. Now, we are doing X plus Y. That's how we want to be known," or, "We were doing X. Now, we want to do very little of X because current consumers, okay, we will take care of them, but now we want to pivot into Y."

(00:42:55):
So it usually is in four of these buckets, and what really happens is it gets down to product managers eventually prioritizing between these four. So I don't think it's a tactical prioritization product manager call. It really is a product strategy call, and the conversation that needs to happen is between, say, the head of product and the CEO or even the leadership. If I gave you a hundred focus points, how much will you put in each of these buckets, and what are those four buckets? Those are the four BB buckets, so what are the ones? We call them... First BB is Brilliant Basics. The reason why we call it BB, Brilliant Basic, you need to brand... You cannot brand it as tech debt, so it feels like very off because these are brilliant, these are important. That's what the company's built on, and the company needs to invest in that. So that's one.

(00:43:46):
The second one is Bread and Butter. So that's your backlogs. If the product managers had no big ideas, and they just were left on their own, what would they come up with in terms of just improving that line of business that they're given? Then, there are Big Bets. Now, that's where your larger ideas that have come together, but how many big bets should we take, or is this big bet even a big one? That's where you're working backwards or PR FAQs start becoming even more important because those are the kind of bets that cannot be taken without everybody basically signing up, working backwards, and saying, "We will all make this successful."

(00:44:26):
Breaking Bad essentially is a different world altogether. That's where you want to redefine your company. For example, in Swiggy, if we were doing food delivery, now we want to do grocery delivery as well. It's like these are two companies working together, or from a food delivery company, we wanted to become a convenience company. So that's almost breaking bad. Again, like I said, we got cheesy, but the good thing that happens is now what you can do is, along with your leadership, take stock, and the head of product essentially can say, "You know what? In the next year, I can invest a lot less on my brilliant basics, and we should as a company focus a lot on this breaking back because that is existential." But then, we should not look back and say, "Why were tech systems a little bit broken this time? We had a little bit more down times."

(00:45:17):
You can basically blow it out and almost showcase what to expect. For example, if we are just working on a whole bunch of bread and butters, so you'll start seeing a lot fewer bugs, customers will be a little happier. You worked a lot more... drill in basics. Tech systems are nice, but you didn't create any differentiators. Well, none of your bets went out, and your competitors are catching up. So does that sound like a better future? These are hard questions, and these privatization questions... I don't think of product management questions so much as product strategy questions, but in a lot of cases, executors don't know what they're trading off against.

(00:45:53):
So if you are able to create the conversation around which buckets do we want to put in and create three alternatives... I have tried to do that a bunch of times. Let's look at strategy A, and we see how to be divergent. Suppose we were putting a lot fewer focus points in brilliant basics and a lot more on, for example, big bets, then there will be a risk that they will be like, "We won't have any experiments or very less experiments. Bugs will stay bugs, but we will get a shot at changing the game." Is that a future that sounds better or something else which is like because you're pained also by a lot of bugs and constant down times, which is more secure, but we won't build something amazing, so which sounds better? Because you are able to drive that, now the clarity to the product managers is way clearer in terms of what will they do. Also, they would know that if they have been signed up for a big bet, then they will need to contribute to the PR FAQ. They will need to contribute to the actual working on that irrespective of what their product was, but now they're part of something bigger.

Lenny (00:47:03):
Awesome. I love it. Okay. So just to summarize so people can have just a very short definition of this framework. Brilliant Basics is essentially tech debt and things that you just have to do like hygiene almost. Bread and Butter is essentially optimizing the product, existing product. Big Bets are big bets, and Breaking Bad are just future big rocket like moon shots just transform the way the business works?

Anuj Rathi (00:47:29):
That's right.

Lenny (00:47:30):
I love it. It's also interesting. Another thread that comes up again and again in your advice is exploring all the options before committing to one like you always... I think it sounds like you always try to recommend three. I guess let me say what I always find is important there is I think it's important for the product manager to recommend one along with that. It's not just like, "Here's three. You tell me which one you do." It's like, "Here's three. Here's my recommendation why." Is that your advice too, or do you see something-

Anuj Rathi (00:47:53):
100%, 100%. So when you have explored the three, you essentially have done the work one like, "I have covered all bases and also crystallized them into a concrete option. Now, I'm choosing one on the company's behalf on the basis of whatever I know about the market, about the company, about our strategy, and about how we will make it successful." Now, if I miss something, it's also a time where you can actually work with leadership and other product managers to essentially get that knowledge complete, or if you're 80% right, you can actually use elements of strategy two and strategy three to bring into one. So that's always the way that your thing that... one very concrete option, but because you have these other tools so that you're not missing and bringing it together. But ultimately, you're the one who is going to champion this, and that's where the other leadership element of Amazon comes in which is disagree and commit. But once we have aligned on this one, we'll all commit to launching this, and then the leadership should not go back and forth on that part.

Lenny (00:48:59):
Awesome. I want to go in a completely different direction. It feels like you have a lot of contrarian opinions about how to build product, and how to build teams, and build companies, and things like that, so I just want to start broad. What are some things you have contrarian opinions about, things you believe that a lot of other people maybe don't believe or seek differently?

Anuj Rathi (00:49:19):
So one, for example, excellence and speed. There's always a question around that. "Hey, would you rather ship faster, or would you rather ship better?" In my opinion, when you have to make a choice, think more and ship better. Most experiments should be thought experiments. They should not even be tried out because they're obviously going to fail which is contrary to, "Let's try it out, and then let's see." I think that wastes a lot of company time. If you had smart people who could do metathinking, a lot of experiments would just not even be like... It's not a rule, but it's a preference. I think speed and excellence are two different axes. Ideally, you should be better at both, but if you had to choose one, choose excellence.

(00:50:04):
There's another contrarian opinion which is... I think most product managers, and again, I'm probably talking a little bit of the kind of people that I work with and have interacted with in product. Most product managers should not even be product managers. They should think a little bit more around whether this is actually the right field for them because I think a lot of people from other areas have entered the field without fully realizing what it takes. So there is definitely a way in which you can coach yourself, and then work your way upwards of that one, but it can make you quite miserable if it's not right for you.

Lenny (00:50:49):
Is there something folks should look for there that will tell them you probably shouldn't be a product manager? Either motivation, or skill set, or background, or anything?

Anuj Rathi (00:50:55):
No. I don't think about particular domains that you come from. I have, again, a simple framework of three. I think the first thing is essentially raw sharps, and that can manifest itself into problem identification and problem solving. That's one, and also, higher-order thinking and all of that. I think that is super important. The second one is what I call drive or grit. I think with that comes a whole bunch of qualities around curiosity, learnability, never giving up, consumer-backward thinking, "I really want to solve this," and all of that that comes with that. Third, which is a little difference, we talked about that, is influence. You're in the business of influence, and if you can see yourself that, "I'm built this way," or, "I want to really get better at these," that's when I think this field is going to serve you well.

Lenny (00:51:45):
I love that everything is three. How handy.

Anuj Rathi (00:51:48):
Only the BBs are four. I wish I could compress them three.

Lenny (00:51:51):
Yeah. There's too many things to do there. Essentially, these are maybe your perspective on the most important PM skills. A good way to think about it. Influence, grit, and just being smart.

Anuj Rathi (00:52:02):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:52:03):
I think what you said here is not like you have to be amazing at these to get into product and do well. It's you need to be excited about getting better at these skills.

Anuj Rathi (00:52:10):
Yes. That's right.

Lenny (00:52:12):
Awesome.

Anuj Rathi (00:52:12):
Well, I think it's not as if that everybody is born with a lot of influence. Of course, you can get better at it, but it's a prospect of that, "Hey, I will need to be influential to succeed at this job." That should excite you and not scare you away. You should not think like, "Hey, you know what? I can get away from this and still be very successful product manager," because most likely, you will not.

Lenny (00:52:34):
Maybe spending a little more time here. So, smart, you're probably not going to be able to do a lot about. In terms of grit or influence, is there anything you can share about what you've seen most helps people develop at these skills other than just doing the job for a while, and then starting to get better at this?

Anuj Rathi (00:52:49):
Yeah. I think even smartness, I think 80% of that smartness, I think, is something that's very achievable. You don't need to be outstanding on that. Domain knowledge, for example, is something just like... An average smart person with no domain knowledge versus you armed with a lot of knowledge around domain and so on can already take you there, but you can take better decisions. I think first one is more about decision-making, problem identification, problem solving, and all of that. So I think that really can be developed at least to a level where you are very effective. Drive, I think, is probably the hardest to coach, probably the hardest. I've not seen people with less drive actually eventually turning out with a lot of drive, et cetera, but they can be inspired. I think you need to be a person who can think about it that way, but the third one, influences, I think, there's no negotiation there. You need to really think that, "I have to be good at this one."

(00:53:46):
There's another framework that, Lenny, I wanted to talk about. When I look at product leadership in general and how do you think about different people and so on. When is it a product manager problem, or your problem, or a company problem? There are only three reasons, again, why things do not happen the way you want them to happen as a leader. You can look at a person, and you would say either that person can't do, which is a capability issue, or they won't do, which is a motivation or an alignment issue, or they were not set up to do, which is really your problem, that you didn't set up the ways of working now design properly, or we are okay as such and such, and so on, and so forth.

(00:54:26):
So, as a leader, it's almost the opposite of what we talked about, great influence and raw sharps. Do you have the right people in terms of capability? If not, is the right answer for us to coach them or to really put them... or mentor them and so on, or move them to some other place because maybe their capability is suited elsewhere? If they won't do, why won't they? Are they not aligned to you? Do they not agree with your vision? Do they not just have enough time? So on and so forth. So you need to really go deeper there. Why won't they do?

(00:55:05):
There are different answers for that, but if it's a setup issue, and at least I've realized that apart from what product managers can do, almost 70%, 80% of problems why things don't happen are a setup issue. Product leaders or other leaders have not thought through what OKRs are doing to my company, not really fully thought through around org design. If you've read the book called TEEN Topologies, that's one interesting book which starts with Conway's law and essentially saying, "Show me an engineering architecture, and I will actually tell you what the org design of this company is," but that also manifests itself in products that you can basically look at a product. In most cases, you will be able to say what was org design that led to this kind of product.

Lenny (00:55:51):
I have heard that book mentioned a couple of times recently. I got to check it out just to the three you just shared, which is another three. I love it. Can do, won't do. What was the third one again, didn't do?

Anuj Rathi (00:56:01):
Not set up to do.

Lenny (00:56:03):
Not set up to do. That one is long. That's a long one. I think what's cool about these are they're essentially ways to measure performance. Maybe if you're a product manager, like performance reviews, it's like, "Did you have the skills to do this? Did you have the motivation to do this, or is it something not set up for you?" You weren't set up for success, basically?

Anuj Rathi (00:56:20):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:56:21):
Okay. Let's go to AI corner, something I'm trying to do with every guest. Is there anything you've learned about working with AI that you think might be helpful to listeners?

Anuj Rathi (00:56:31):
Yeah. I think a couple of things. I think working with AI, many, many teams and companies get too excited about AI, and the possibilities, and so on, and it's almost like a solution ready to find a problem within their companies, which also is fine because now you're thinking about possibilities on what this particular technology can do for my company. So it's a good way to start, but many people don't actually use it in the best way possible and force fit it. Instead of that, you can think about, "How do I get AI to work with HI?" Again, it's connecting back with... and this is something that Swiggy CEO, Sriharsha, invented this term called HI just to make sure that everybody understands.

(00:57:13):
Artificial intelligence is important as much as human intelligence. If you're not humanly intelligent, you're not going to be artificially intelligent or AI really help your company a lot. So, literally, any product that you're building, even when it is technologically quite interesting, and exciting, and so on, it needs to be balanced out and work together along with a great UX, along with behavioral science. The combination of those two will actually make sure that you're getting the best outcome of that, unless you are building something which is completely backed and with no human interventions. We're talking about consumer products largely.

Lenny (00:57:51):
You've helped build some of the most successful marketplaces in India and in the world. I'm curious just what may be a lesson or two about building a successful marketplace?

Anuj Rathi (00:58:02):
One thing that I would definitely want to talk about is when you're thinking marketplaces, it's not as a one plus one equals two, it multiplies. We're thinking about three-way marketplaces. You almost not need to think like it's a two-dimensional plane going into three-dimension. It becomes that amount of complexity, and your regular product management and leadership principles start failing. So a bunch of usual suspects will not work. Let me give an example. OKRs will not work. Why not? So, fundamentally, OKRs are a way to think about objectives and key results, but the fundamental assumption here is that it is solving for a kind of user, and that kind of user, you can divide and conquer. Of course, there will be a little bit of tussle between different teams, but you can get them to work with each other. But if it is working for three different kinds of users, then all the goals will all the time be in conflict with each other.

Lenny (00:59:00):
What are examples of the three users? There's like the delivery person, the restaurant-

Anuj Rathi (00:59:04):
The end user. So if you have... I'll give you an example of. On the consumer side, we need to collect more delivery fee. What does that really mean for those other two? On the restaurant side, hey, we need to get more commissions because profitability is a goal. On the delivery partner side, it means pay them less or optimize a little bit more. But once you start moving one lever, those two are already stretched towards the other directions. They're not independent levers in the first place, and the way to even model them out... How will it work? What if we choose X versus what... Ys will change. Y on Z. Z will change. It's almost impossible to do that.

(00:59:43):
So I've seen OKRs fail multiple times when you're running this kind of a marketplace. Big bets work much better. That's when you say, "Hey, we want to take this bit," but it's all going to be... It's all going to come together as... If we pull this lever, then something else will change. So here's the entire story of, "Let's go make this profitable by making delivery fee higher, but maybe not touching earnings per hour, or maybe not touching restaurant commissions." Things like that. So I've at least found that's a better way to choose strategically which direction we have to go.

(01:00:18):
The other thing is managing multiple empathies together that's not straightforward. So, again, Swiggy being a real-time, hyper-local marketplace, and we discussed about that, right? As soon as the order comes, what happens between when user does this and when delivery executor is doing something else, and what are absolute different kind of scenarios that are going to be faced by the delivery executor? At the same time, how will I really work with the user to manage their emotions? So you need to manage a whole bunch of these things together, and product management here, you cannot have... The delivery executive product manager only care about that side. They also need to be a champion on the consumer side and vice versa.

Lenny (01:01:03):
Yeah. I find with marketplaces... Uber went through this, Lyft went through this where the supply often just gets squeezed because they need to deliver for the customer. So drivers end up getting housed. Airbnb hosts get pushed to do things they may not want to do. Imagine delivery people, same thing.

Anuj Rathi (01:01:18):
Now that you mentioned Uber, for example, one of the things that companies which were running taxi businesses. If you have just one limited pool of money, for example, and you want to get the marketplace humming with respect to number of orders per day, how do you decide, "Should I incentivize my users, for example, for the first ride, first 10 rides, and so on, or put zero money in there, but incentivize my drivers?" You need to come here, so you have to think about liquidity also in very different ways, and sometimes you need to pull the lever completely towards the other side. So the experiments also. A/B experiments also don't work, and that's a very unique thing about marketplaces. I mean, not work the way that you would expect them to work because there are network effects all over. So if you have to run A/B experiments on your drivers side, if you put half drivers on A versus half on B, but there is a network effect between the both of them.

Lenny (01:02:19):
When you're trying to decide which side of the marketplace to focus on and prioritize, do you have any lessons or rules of thumb of just focus on the customer and index towards their happiness versus the supply versus, say, the delivery person?

Anuj Rathi (01:02:32):
There's one thing that I think marketplaces need to realize is that, A, you need to be operating in a stable marketplace. So all sides need to be stable enough so that they're not going to go away. So I think that's a starting point, and that's an important point because once we have established that, then after a stable marketplace, then we say, "Which are the kind of customer that we are in the service for? Which are the customer that we will really focus on?" For example, Amazon is very, very clearly a customer-centric company. If they have to make a choice, they won't because they need to have a stable marketplace. So sellers also are very... as important, but slightly more important than the customer.

(01:03:10):
For example, if you looked at, say, Taobao or in Alibaba, their way of thinking is their aim in life is to create life-changing experience for 10 million Chinese sellers, and they will create a marketplace from the point of view of sellers which can actually sell. Again, they will have the same consumer app, and a seller work, and so on. They are in the service of sellers, so you really need to derive from the company's vision. I think the way we had thought about it at Swiggy that we had to clarify in our values that the first value is... Initially, it used to be customer comes first, but that was very confusing because everybody is a customer. Even a restaurant is a selling customer and so on. We had to clarify that consumer comes first, the end consumer which is actually eating food because we are a convenience company that delivers to the end consumer, and when you're thinking about restaurants or delivery partners, we work with them because we both are... When you're talking with the delivery partner, Swiggy and the delivery partner, we both are in the service of the customer. So you'll build that app also from that perspective and even the restaurant side also from that perspective that we both are together in the service of the end customer.

Lenny (01:04:25):
I feel like you have probably a hundred more frameworks, and processes, and acronyms we can talk about, but I know you got to go. Is there anything else you wanted to touch on, or is there anything else you want to leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Anuj Rathi (01:04:38):
Just last few words that I want to revise. Work backwards from an amazing future. So first thing is creatively imagine a future, and then work backwards from that, and essentially, think what will make that successful, and be paranoid about... that everything is going to go wrong. Hence, I need to just make sure that it all comes together.

Lenny (01:04:59):
Only the paranoids survive. Great advice to leave people with. We've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Anuj Rathi (01:05:07):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:05:07):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Anuj Rathi (01:05:12):
One book is Working Backwards. We covered that. The other one that has shaped my beliefs a lot is called How Brands Grow by a professor called Byron Sharp. There are two paths to it, How Brands Grow 1 and 2, that's both very good. The other book which I really love is... and recently, Kunal Shah, who's the founder of Cred, an Indian startup, suggested is The Luxury Strategy. The reason why I love that book is because it gets into the depth of the human psychology behind hierarchies, and how lords, and kings, and those kind of social hierarchies have shaped how people think about aspirational products and so on. So highly recommend it.

Lenny (01:05:52):
What's a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Anuj Rathi (01:05:57):
I really like to do reruns of The Office. I was trying to think about this as, "What is a recent movie that I watched?" I'm like, "No." I keep on going back to The Office and some other episode. Like today, I have a lot of stories from Michael Scott.

Lenny (01:06:13):
Okay. The US one, not the British one, or do you watch both?

Anuj Rathi (01:06:16):
No. I watch both, but the US one has a lot more seasons.

Lenny (01:06:21):
Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates when you're interviewing product-manager-specific?

Anuj Rathi (01:06:27):
"Which are the products where you decide speed is more important versus which are the products where you have to say excellence is what's important?" I think that gives me a good understanding of their frameworks and why they're just saying what, and then we go back into concrete examples where they chose one versus the other, and then take it from there.

Lenny (01:06:46):
Then, what do you look for In a good answer to that question?

Anuj Rathi (01:06:49):
I look for, essentially, their assessment of risk, their assessment of how important or how well have they assessed the market and the competition or the competitive products in that market. If their answer is, "Let's ship something, and we'll find out, and so on," that also gives me, basically, a point of view that they really don't understand that this product, what they're talking about with the shipping speed, is not really... The V part of the MVP is not viable or is not... I don't know. How do you call the MLP or whatever? But it's not differentiated enough that it can be marketed. It is not worth enough where we can take it to user. It's not going to work for a lazy win and selfish user, and maybe that's not the answer towards speed versus excellence versus, for example, there's some products which are... There's a very clear competitive differentiation that we can find. There was a clear market gap. I want to launch something even if it is half-baked. No problem. I want to go, take it out, get user feedback, I trade, and so on. So understanding of the market, A, but B, also understanding of the core orientation.

Lenny (01:08:00):
It comes back to your ongoing advice of being full-stack in a lot of ways, and in this case, being a full-stack PM thinking about marketing, launch, and adoption, all those things. Next question, what is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Anuj Rathi (01:08:15):
The very recent product that I like is called RISE. It's a sleep track app because I am half insomniac, and for the longest time, I was thinking about, "How can I track this? What am I doing, and how can I actually get better at this?" So I really like the way that they actually help the end user. It's just been a week since I've started using it, but recommend it.

Lenny (01:08:42):
Has that helped your sleep yet or too soon to say?

Anuj Rathi (01:08:45):
It's helped me track my sleep, so it's... Now, it's getting into the zone where it is actionable, but I like it.

Lenny (01:08:51):
Okay, okay. We'll see.

Anuj Rathi (01:08:52):
We'll see.

Lenny (01:08:53):
Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, share with people, think about in either work or life?

Anuj Rathi (01:09:01):
I would call it a life motto as much, but one of the things that I keep telling my people who work with me, alongside me, and so on is, "Stop externalizing." That's one, which also means the more artistic way to say that is you are the reason for your own misery. So that's something that I keep using a lot more in a fun way. But if things go wrong, if that leadership meeting didn't happen in that way, if my product bombed, and so on, go back and let's ask ourselves what could we have done better, what I could have done better, and so on. Of course, because I'm also a poker player, so in a way, I understand there is half luck involved and half skill. But over a long period of time, if it's only luck and you're failing, and failing, and failing, you have to go and look back at your skill. So, yeah. You are the reason for your own misery.

Lenny (01:09:50):
I love that advice. Be very empowering, and be responsible. Final question. I was stalking your LinkedIn. You host an event called The Secret Soiree, which is not that secret because you post about it, but I'm curious, just what is that all about, and what got you to do these sorts of events?

Anuj Rathi (01:10:07):
So we just started, me and an ex-colleague of mine, Shivangi. So we essentially wanted to meet cool people around. So that's how it started. Interesting people without agenda who can come together and discuss interesting stuff about entrepreneurship, about startups, about products, about connections, and so on, and so forth. So it just started like that, and now we are onto many, many more interesting things that we are bringing in terms of cohorts which will be team-based. So it could be around product management, around marketing, around growth, and so on. We are strictly keeping it not-for-profit for at least the next year, but long way to go.

Lenny (01:10:51):
Amazing, and so for listeners, is this something they could join? Who should look into this? Who is this for?

Anuj Rathi (01:10:57):
Absolutely. At that time, probably, we'll not call it The Secret Soiree once we have probably expanded.

Lenny (01:11:02):
No longer secret. Okay. Cool, and then I guess they just follow you on LinkedIn, right? That's how they can keep up to date with these sorts of events. Okay. Cool.

Anuj Rathi (01:11:11):
Yes, on LinkedIn as well as on Twitter.

Lenny (01:11:12):
Awesome. Anuj, we've gone through so many topics. We've talked about breaking bad and full-stack product management, full-stack thinking, working backwards, bread and butter, rule of threes. I don't know. So many things. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and follow up on anything we've talked about, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Anuj Rathi (01:11:33):
Yes. So I'm on Twitter, so on twitter.com/anujrathi, and LinkedIn, you can just search my name. I'm pretty active on both of them. I do a bunch of... not podcasts all the time like you host, Lenny, but a bunch of other events as well as talks, so. I keep on posting on Twitter. They can find me there.

Lenny (01:11:55):
Amazing. Anuj, thank you so much for being here.

Anuj Rathi (01:11:59):
Thank you so much, Lenny, for hosting.

Lenny (01:12:01):
It's my pleasure. Bye, everyone.

(01:12:05):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Archie Abrams (00:00:00):
When you have teams naturally break up the world into different funnel stages or different points in the journey, it gets very seductive to look at my part of the funnel and what's my conversion rate through that part of the funnel, right? And then the team starts to optimize for that conversion rate as their north star. But in practice, it's actually almost always easier to just make it harder to do the thing right before your step in the funnel to increase your conversion rate. Instead of I'm trying to convert a bunch of people, I just want more people to get activated.

(00:00:32):
And then once you start thinking that way, you realize actually the best way to get more people to get to a step is just get more people in the door in the first place. That will always hurt your conversion rate, but it may actually give you more people on the outside.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:48):
Today my guest is Archie Abrams. Archie is VP of product and head of growth at Shopify, where he leads an org of over 600 people across product, design, engineering, data ops, and growth marketing. Shopify is both an incredibly unique and also an incredibly successful business, and they do things very differently. And as a result, there's a lot that we can learn from how they approach building product and driving growth.

(00:01:12):
Some examples include their priorities in product roadmap are driven by a 100-year vision that comes from Tobi, the CEO. And the core product teams don't have metrics or KPIs. They're essentially banned. And instead, decisions are made based on taste, and intuition, and building towards this long-term vision. Also, the growth team optimizes for churn, which is unlike any other company I've ever come across. And once you hear why, this will make a lot of sense.

(00:01:38):
Also, they keep long-term holdouts for every experiment they run, and they automatically look at the impact these experiments have had on the business a year later, two years later, and three years later, and then revisit these decisions down the road.

(00:01:52):
And in our conversation, we dig into all of this plus how Shopify organizes their growth team, how they run experiments, how the growth team collaborates with the product team, how they measure impact. Plus, Archie shares a bunch of very specific and interesting examples of changes that have driven growth for the business and so much more. This is such a fascinating conversation, and I know this will give you a lot to think about in terms of how you run and organize your own product and growth teams. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Archie Abrams. 

(00:02:34):
Archie, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast. 

Archie Abrams (00:02:38):
Thanks Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:38):
Excited to be here. Okay, so what I want to do with our time together is to basically do kind of a living archeology of how Shopify grows and what you specifically have learned about growing a company like Shopify into this just juggernaut of a business that it's turned into. To give people a little bit of a sense of just how large Shopify has gotten, so maybe surprising them about the scale of this company at this point. Could you share some stats about the scale of the business at this point?

Archie Abrams (00:03:09):
Yeah, absolutely. So overall, we're about 10% of e-commerce in the United States. So basically if you're not buying an Amazon or Walmart, you're probably buying on a Shopify-powered store. And behind the scenes globally, we did about 235 billion in GMV in 2023, which is roughly the size of the economy of Finland. So we've got a big economy and big impact happening from Shopify.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:37):
Wow. I think interestingly with Shopify, it's kind of this behind the scenes tool, and so I imagine many people have no idea they're using Shopify a lot of time when they're buying stuff online, and I think some of these numbers kind of creep up on people with just how large a company like Shopify has gotten.

Archie Abrams (00:03:53):
100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:56):
This episode is brought to you by Explo, a game changer for customer facing analytics and data reporting. Are your users craving more dashboards, reports, and analytics within your product? Are you tired of trying to build it yourself? As a product leader, you probably have these requests on your roadmap, but the struggle to prioritize them is real. Building analytics from scratch can be time-consuming, expensive, and a really challenging process. Enter Explo. Explo is a fully white labeled embedded analytics solution designed entirely with your user in mind.

(00:04:29):
Getting started is easy. Explo connects to any relational database or warehouse. And with its low-code functionality, you can build and style dashboards in minutes. Once you're ready, simply embed the dashboard or report into your application with a tiny code snippet. The best part, your end users can use Explo's AI features for their own report and dashboard generation, eliminating customer data requests for your support team. Build and embed a fully white labeled analytics experience in days. Try for free at explo.co/lenny. That's E-X-P-L-O dot C-O slash Lenny. 

(00:05:08):
This episode is brought to you by Dovetail, the AI first customer insights hub for all teams. Dovetail has always been the go-to tool for teams who want to find insights in customer calls, user interviews, or documents. Now they've stepped it up with the release of Dovetail 3.0. that's three new products and a ton of AI features that make it faster and easier than ever before to truly get at the heart of what your customers want. You can get a real-time pulse on what your customers are thinking with Dovetail's, automated feedback analysis platform, channels, or pull summaries and insights from every customer interaction your team has ever had with their AI chatbot Ask Dovetail. You can even recruit from over 3 million participants directly in Dovetail. All this is just the tip of the Iceberg. Dovetail wants to give everyone in their organization instant access to their customers at any time. From roadmaps, discovery, to strategy sessions and more, it's never been easier to make customer-centric decisions. The good news is Lenny's listeners can try Dovetail's Pro plan along with their newest products and features free for 30 days. Just go to dovetail.com/lenny. 

(00:06:18):
I want to start with something that I think is most unique from what I've heard, and I think there's going to be a lot of really unique approaches to how you all think about growth. One of the most interesting things I've heard is that how you think about churn and retention. To most companies, the most important thing is to increase retention, reduce churn. My sense or my understanding is you guys are kind of the opposite. You one, don't think tons about churn, you almost optimize for churn. Talk about that. How does that work?

Archie Abrams (00:06:48):
The way we think about churn is really going back to Shopify as a kind of our mission and what we want to do, which is to increase the amount of entrepreneurship on the internet. And so as a business, we want to make it as easy as possible to get started with your online store, with your business.

(00:07:06):
But most businesses do ultimately fail. And so the way we look at it is can we lower the barriers to getting started and get as many people in the door trying their hand at entrepreneurship? If we do that, again, many of those businesses, many of those folks will maybe on their first attempt not be as successful, but we're going to have a set of merchants who go on to become extremely big businesses, the Allbirds of the world, FIGS, etc.

(00:07:36):
And the way the Shopify business model works is we do charge a subscription, but most of our revenue comes from payments, which is tied to directly to a merchant's success. So in a given cohort of merchants, a lot of people will start. Some of those people on their first attempt that's entrepreneurship might not succeed, but the folks who do go on to be successful will make that entire cohort of merchants who started something that makes Shopify as a business extremely successful. And that's why we lower the barriers to get started and help folks grow, and those winners make the whole thing work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:12):
I love that. So what I'm hearing is it's not that you don't want people to stick around, it's not that you don't want people to succeed. It's that you're not optimizing every new shop for sticking around long-term. It's basically make it as easy as possible for people to try it. And all you need is a few big wins for it to all work out.

Archie Abrams (00:08:33):
Correct. And that's really a different insight than most SaaS companies that they get a customer, they really never want that person to leave. And we want to lower that barriers to get started and be successful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:44):
One of the main reasons companies focus so much on churn and retention is because it costs them a lot of money to drive new customers and users. I imagine there's almost an implied it's really cheap for you all to find new customers because of maybe the brand and word of mouth. Is that true?

Archie Abrams (00:08:59):
I think that definitely has some dynamics. I think the bigger factor is the monetization model. For most SaaS companies, they're making from a subscription, right? 29 bucks a month is the only way that they're going to really monetize. Whereas our business works, you have folks who are paying a subscription. But as folks get bigger, because we're monetizing on that GMV that that merchant is producing or the revenue the merchant is producing in the form of payments and other services, it allows us to grow with the merchant in those really successful merchants, make the whole system work well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:34):
Got it. So basically, your net dollar retention or network revenue retention is just absurd for the winners and it makes up for all the losers slash not losers, people that have tried to build an online-

Archie Abrams (00:09:44):
Yes, tried and haven't been very successful. When you can think of the other parallel is in angel investing, right? Most of angel investments are not going to work out, but the couple that do make that entire investment portfolio successful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:00):
With retention not being the primary goal and the metric you guys focus on optimizing, how do you know if you're doing well? Is it some number of these winners have to come out every quarter, every year? How do you think about progress and achieving, and success basically for growth?

Archie Abrams (00:10:18):
This way is thinking about a cohort of users we acquire in a given time period, say a quarter. And then over the next year, two years, three years, four years, five years, how much GMV have those merchants produced in total? Not about per merchant basis, but in total, did that cohort generate GMV? And if they generate GMV, that will translate into revenue and gross profit and all of those things that we can then use to reinvest in growing the business. So it's really looking at the total value, but on that GMV basis. And GMV is a power law based metric. And so it's really that power law that drives the success of each cohort.

(00:10:56):
Again, going back to investing, same thing there. Each vintage from a fund, how much did that return as a fund? And it's really driven by the few really successful outliers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:09):
So this begs the question, that sounds like a very long feedback loop. And I don't know what I do with that information if five years from now, "Oh okay, that was a really good idea we did five years ago."

Archie Abrams (00:11:18):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:19):
Comment on that. It touches on something you said about how metrics aren't actually a driver of how you all think at Shopify, so take that wherever you want to go.

Archie Abrams (00:11:26):
Yeah. So it's interesting. I think with Shopify, we very purposely set up different parts of the org to think on very different time horizons and with very different ways of thinking about how to build product and the like. Very different than a lot of companies that typically, have maybe one kind of unified, there's one north star that the entire company is rallying around. 

(00:11:49):
And so there's three major product groups at Shopify. There's core product which is basically building the 100 year, the right things for commerce 100 years from now. There's merchant services which is building things like payments, shipping, the tools that entrepreneurs need to be successful with a more shorter or medium term horizon. And then growth is really thinking about that end-to-end customer journey. How can we bring folks on and make sure they're successful?

(00:12:19):
And then from a metrics standpoint, we do have obviously some leading indicators in growth that we're looking at on a given experiment or what have you. But the key in what we try to instrument in our experimentation is the ability to really look at longterm effects of experiments.

(00:12:37):
So we constantly will relook at an experiment a year later, see that the way the GMV curve for the distribution was different than we might've originally thought. And that'll actually change what we do from that previous experiment. And so there's a lot of longterm monitoring of experiments over these very long time horizons to both inform what those input metrics are and more importantly hold ourselves accountable to, did we actually move what we cared about, which is that longterm GMV, in the right way?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:12):
Wow. Okay. I want to spend more time here. So the way you're describing it is the way the business operates is you think, what is our 100-year plan? How do we think, where does this need to be in 100 years? And with that, it allows you to run these long holdout experiments to see, is something we're doing impacting the business broadly? And because you think so longterm, you can take a year, or two, or three to see if there's an impact and then make adjustments versus I'm having to drive a certain metric every quarter, every year.

Archie Abrams (00:13:47):
Correct. And I mean on growth, we're definitely in the... We want to drive metrics on a short-term basis and we can do that obviously, but we have the luxury, and the way Tobi thinks about the world and the way we operate, to really think about these longterm effects and make sure that we're holding ourselves accountable with these longterm holdouts, and then constantly refining the input metrics that we're using and getting a lot smarter about that. But because we take that long horizon, it allows us to be better in the short term and just get a lot smarter.

(00:14:17):
And a lot of counterintuitive things. And I would encourage everyone, if you can, look at some of the experiments that you thought were your biggest winners. Look at the downstream metrics for a year, two years on that experiment. And I'll bet you'd be surprised how many times the metric is different than what you thought it would be after a year.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:36):
Because where people just make a call at a certain point in time, here's the list in it, here's the list experience. I love this, because very few people have experiences running a longterm experiment, and so this is a really interesting insight that you're sharing that, I guess how often do you find this to be true in your long-term holdouts, where things end up being very different downstream?

Archie Abrams (00:14:59):
I think there's probably two things that have been very common. And I would say in quite a few cases, you get a lift on a metric up front, a more short-term metric. Number of people who become a paying shopper, number of people who make their first sale in Shopify. And then you look a year later, and there's actually no incremental lift on GMV from that cohort.

(00:15:21):
And so I think it actually trains, a lot of us in growth are looking at these short-term metrics. A lot of the time it's actually more pull-forward effect, than you fully realize or an incremental user that's just really not worth that much. So that's one.

(00:15:35):
And then two, so this effect size goes away. There are cases where the experiment has flipped the other way. And then there are cases, and these are the most interesting ones, where you realize that you uncovered a pocket of merchants that are actually extremely valuable entrepreneurs who go on to be successful, that you missed in your normal short-term measurement techniques. And so all across the board we see that. But actually the most common is it actually isn't a long-term lift from a lot of things that you might think of the short-term are.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:16):
Is there an example in that second bucket of what you mean when you say there's a pocket of valuable merchants?

Archie Abrams (00:16:22):
Yeah, I think a lot of this has to do with, we call it monetary friction. So one of the hardest things to do with a business is when you're getting started, is you might not have any revenue coming in, and you are kind of bootstrapping, which in Shopify's case might be 39 bucks a month. But still, it's a real expense. 

(00:16:43):
And so typically when you can lower the barriers to monetary friction in some form, that could be all sorts of monetary friction early. The common belief is that we'll usually get lower quality folks coming in the door, because usually discounts are associated with lower quality. 

(00:17:03):
If you think about in a business case, if I give you a little monetary boost and reduce that monetary friction, I can actually causally change your ability to become successful, because I've given you a little bit more time to try that idea a little bit longer. I've given you that opportunity to move your business over to Shopify. And so often in those types of experiments you see that you've basically unlocked a class of people who might've given up without reducing that monetary friction

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:35):
Interesting. And giving them time to actually make it work.

Archie Abrams (00:17:39):
To make it work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:40):
Okay. So just roughly, do you have a sense of how often you find no effect after a year that you saw early impact? Just to ballpark that.

Archie Abrams (00:17:50):
Yeah, it's in the 30 to 40% range.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:51):
Okay. I think you're tearing the heart out of so many growth people right now, and nobody wants to hear this that works on growth where you're saying potentially a third of the experiments they're running today that are showing lift probably don't have that same... Don't have any impact down the road.

Archie Abrams (00:18:09):
Yes. Unfortunately, I think that's brutal. Probably more common than we like to believe.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:15):
Yes, and nobody wants to hear this, except people that you should want to hear this because if you want to build a business that grows and need to grow, it's better to know to learn that now. 

Archie Abrams (00:18:28):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:29):
Okay. So for people that can't run whole long hold that experiments, I guess is there anything that you find is a good early indicator that might be the case? Most people don't have time to sit around and wait a year or two or three. They're not thinking 100 years.

Archie Abrams (00:18:43):
I mean I think end of the day that is going to be the most effective and you actually learn the most. I think it is, though even in shorter term horizons, really being as specific as you can be about what are the early signs of success in your product, and making sure you instrument those. And then making sure, particularly up funnel experiments, you are actually looking at the further downstream metrics to make sure you have some understanding of what's moving down. 

(00:19:17):
So as deep as you can go in the funnel for as long as you can wait. Do that. And if you can't, you know what I would say? Still you should just bet on, if something is showing lift up funnel, still ship it and it's probably not going to hurt you, but don't overestimate the amount of impact that this is having.

(00:19:34):
So it's funny, two things here is, my recommendation to folks is don't think, "Oh my goodness, I have to wait all this time." Because if you didn't move the short-term impact, you're not going to have the long-term lift. So still ship if it's short-term lift. Just be reasonable that if you can measure it longer term, you'll get better about identifying what things are that are really impactful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:57):
Got it. And so it may be positive initially, but often neutral. Rarely is it neutral initially and then positive down the road?

Archie Abrams (00:20:09):
There are some cases of that, but it's rarely... I've seen neutral be positive, but I haven't seen negative.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:15):
Got it. Okay-

Archie Abrams (00:20:16):
That resulted positive. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:17):
Got it. Okay. So that's reassuring. You're not harming the business, but you're probably getting a lot more credit than you deserve as a growth team shipping things that are-

Archie Abrams (00:20:27):
Likely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:28):
Likely, right?

Archie Abrams (00:20:29):
Likely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:29):
And there's also just trade-offs to moving on and on balance, you're probably doing good things if you continue to ship things that are showing positive. Right?

Archie Abrams (00:20:39):
100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:40):
Okay. This is awesome. For people that want to run long-term holdout experiments, I imagine you've built your own experimentation system internally? Yeah, we have.

Archie Abrams (00:20:50):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:51):
And is it basically you hold out 10%, say it was some percentage of users from seeing the new change? Is that how you approach it or is there a different way of approach?

Archie Abrams (00:20:59):
Two things. We have two layers of holdouts. So one is more the holdouts of every change in a quarter, holdout 5% across the board. Second is for changes that only affect new merchants, what we'll do is we'll take that group of folks, let's call it 50/50 split, and then run that for a few weeks. And then what we're doing, we look at the long-term effects is actually ship the winner to 100%, but we're looking at the cohort of folks who was assigned to the experiment. We're going back and looking at those people who were assigned a year later.

(00:21:36):
So it allows us to still ship, get stuff out, but we've kind of held the experiment in a way that allows us to see those long-term effects just for the cohort that was exposed. That only works if you're doing it on new users. For existing, it's a little more complicated. That's okay. And then in our experimentation tools, all experimenters are paying that three months, six months, nine months, 12 months with here are the updated results. So you can't really get hide from, what did this really result in over a longer term horizon?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:10):
So your tool is email everyone that's involved with the experiment of here's what this cohort is doing now.

Archie Abrams (00:22:16):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:16):
I love that. Okay, that's awesome. It's interesting that you use kind of these cohort curves for GMV, and is that the core metric you look at to see?

Archie Abrams (00:22:25):
There's a few GMV, obviously gross profit. But GMV is kind of like a key determinant of long-term success.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:35):
So it's interesting. Most people use cohort retention curves. You're using cohort because you don't look at retention. You're looking at for GMV over time. So that's really interesting. 

Archie Abrams (00:22:45):
GMV over time, which correlates better. And there's a retention in profit. And then really the absolute number of merchants who are on the platform and then reaching certain GMV.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:56):
Okay, I'm going to not keep falling this path. We can go on and on. While we're in the topic of experiments and what you've done, I'm curious if there's any examples of big wins that your team has shipped that might inspire people as they're thinking about launching experiments. I know there's probably some trade secret stuff you don't want competitors to know, and I know this is particular to Shopify and a platform in eCommerce. But I guess is there anything that would be worth sharing of like, "Here's a huge win that maybe we didn't expect."

Archie Abrams (00:23:25):
Going back, there's always a lot of value in thinking through monetary friction as I mentioned. That's always going to be something to export. Trial dynamics, different types of incentives, all of those things are very impactful.

(00:23:39):
I would say on things that are maybe more practical and for everyone, there's an enormous amount, and we do see these with long-term effects. But just the nuts and bolts of sign up, collecting the right information. And you usually want to collect more information than most people think you do in your sign up flow. If you can then leverage that to personalize the guidance. And this is for SaaS product, the guidance that someone can get when they onboard into Shopify. 

(00:24:09):
So whether you're coming on, Shopify is a very diverse product, in-person selling, online selling different channels. There's the nuts and bolts of get more information from folks, build trust in there, give them right amount of guidance when they come on in a personalized way.

(00:24:25):
And that may sound like, okay, that's kind of obvious. But the amount of impact by just nailing those flows has never ceased to amaze me and setting up that person for long-term success. So monetary friction. Then just really good onboarding, personalization, a well of opportunities there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:49):
I love that onboarding comes up every time I ask anyone where they've seen ongoing success and opportunities, particularly in actually surprisingly driving retention. It's interesting that that's not what you look at, but it turns out that's one of the biggest levers for increasing retention. Interesting that even for a company that doesn't look at retention, that's a big opportunity.

Archie Abrams (00:25:07):
Yes. Yeah, it's really because it's setting people up, for Shopify's case, I think the big thing about all of our metrics is... What we get very nervous about is the easiest way to increase retention is always to constrict the funnel stage one above the retention metric you're trying to optimize for. 

(00:25:27):
The simplest way to increase my signup to activated thing is just make it harder to sign up. Nuts and bolts, that will always happen is when you have teams on that local conversion rates, you get all these weird team incentives, because they're optimizing to basically implicitly make it harder to do the step before them.

(00:25:49):
And because we focus on that long-term GMV, number of merchants who are successful, orienting every team to think about the total number of people, not the rate, but the total number of people who got to the end of their part of the journey is a very powerful way to incentivize people to do the right thing in terms of getting people set up versus do the, "I'm going to constrict the funnel step right before me to make my local conversion rate look better," which is the bane of my existence but something I see a lot of teams, implicitly or explicitly do when they get too focused on rates as a way to think about the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:32):
Incentives. What a power.

Archie Abrams (00:26:34):
Incentives, what a power, what a lever.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:36):
I definitely want to chat a little bit more about metrics. I know you have a really interesting take that's kind of built on what you're just talking about. But first of all, you mentioned this term monetary friction as one of the levers that you've seen success with. Can you just describe what that actually means?

Archie Abrams (00:26:48):
Totally. So things like trial, trial dynamics, trial length, trial amount. It means incentives. So what is in your product? What do people value and need in order to be successful? So in Shopify's case, that might be app score credits or things like that, but those are the two forms of monetary friction we talk about and then of course actual price point. But that's what the larger bucket of monetary friction is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:16):
So let's follow this thread of metrics. You're big on absolute numbers and you've been talking about this already, versus percentages and ratios. Talk about that and how you encourage your teams to think about metrics.

Archie Abrams (00:27:29):
Yeah, I think one of the things that I think happens particularly in large, in Shopify's growth order, it's about 600 folks. When you have teams naturally break up the world into different funnel stages or different points in the journey, it gets very seductive to look at my part of the funnel, and what's my conversion rate through that part of the funnel? And then the team starts to optimize for that conversion rate as their north star over a longer time period. I'm going to try to move my conversion rate from 10 to 12% or what have you.

(00:28:04):
But in practice, I talked about it's actually almost always easier to just make it harder to do the thing right before your step in the funnel to increase your conversion rate. If I make it harder to sign up, it's going to be very easy to increase sign up to activated rate, because I just have fewer people and the people who made it through our higher intent.

(00:28:23):
And so I see teams get really stuck when they are trying to optimize conversion rate, but they just make it harder to do the previous thing. Versus everyone is thinking about absolute number of people who made it through their "stage" of the funnel. So instead of I'm trying to convert a bunch of people, a conversion rate, I just want more people to get activated.

(00:28:48):
And then once you start thinking that way, you realize actually the best way to get more people to get to a step sometimes, and often they just get more people in the door in the first place. So make it easier to sign up or reduce friction. It's the opposite. 

(00:29:05):
Because that will always hurt your conversion rate, but it may actually give you more people on the outside. And a lot of teams get very nervous, their retention rate went down, their LTV went down. Oh my goodness, is this this going to affect our ability to pay? No, your CAC also went down by probably more. And so now you have the ability to likely spend more and you have more people through the door, getting to each point in the activation or the immersion journeys.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:33):
What I'm hearing is essentially teams are gold not on increase, lift this conversion step by some percentage. It's drive some absolute number of new merchants, potentially.

Archie Abrams (00:29:45):
Merchants, yeah. Exactly. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:47):
This is a good segue to I want to hear how you structure your growth team at Shopify. Essentially, what's the raw structure, what are the different teams, and what do they focus on? And then what are the functions within each teams?

Archie Abrams (00:29:59):
We have two big groups within growth. So one is what we call growth R&D. So this might be what you traditionally consider product design engineering, data, your traditional product teams. Then we have growth marketing, which in Shopify's case is paid acquisition, media buying, affiliate marketing, email, content, and SEO. So that's growth R&D, growth marketing.

(00:30:23):
Within growth R&D, three pillars. One is what we call growth products. And so this is basically everything from landing pages, sign up, onboarding, monetization. So trial, incentives, the like, all the way through to what we call our home feed, our engagement to basically get more merchants. Again, not necessarily to retain, but to keep giving entrepreneurship a try to become bigger and bigger businesses. So that's growth product, the full life cycle there. 

(00:30:56):
Second is what we call our enable pillar, and this pillar is building tools for both growth and the rest of Shopify. So things like experimentation platform, our communication platform, our business intelligence tooling that powers a lot of what we're doing, our more tech work to support our growth marketing team. 

(00:31:14):
And then our third bucket, which is maybe a little different from most growth teams is actually our customer support, groups within growth. We want to think about customer support as part of this merchant journey of coming on, giving entrepreneurship a try, all the way through to here's the support I need as I'm becoming a multi-billion dollar business on Shopify. So those are the three big growth product buckets. And then within growth marketing, it's a more traditional channel setup. Paid, all the different channels online, offline, SEO, email, and affiliates.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:49):
Super cool. Okay. So within growth RD, I just took notes. I'm going to summarize what you just shared, which is awesome. So there's three big buckets. One is growth product, which essentially is onboarding. It feels like it's like the top of funnel, get people in. Well okay, so growth marketing feels like that's super top of funnel bring-

Archie Abrams (00:32:07):
That's super top funnel. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:08):
Yeah. Okay, got it. So growth marketing, drive people to Shopify.com. Then within RD team, growth product takes that user and tries to get them to activate it. Enable helps... It feels like that's like internal tooling and ways to make the teams internally more efficient.

Archie Abrams (00:32:27):
Correct. Both growth and outside growth.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:29):
Awesome. Okay. And then the customer support team, that's really interesting. So there's a customer support product team that helps new merchants be successful. And does that include actual customer support agents? Is that within that team?

Archie Abrams (00:32:46):
That's not. We build a tooling to make those support advisors superheroes. And then on the help center, all of our AI stuff to make a great customer experience for people who are just engaging in a self-serve. So it's the tooling and the experience for merchants.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:03):
Okay. So with these teams, is there anything you can share about just how you think about metrics/goals for these different buckets? We don't need to get too deeply, but does everyone basically have an absolute new merchants goal or is it a little different?

Archie Abrams (00:33:18):
So yeah. So at the highest level we think about that total cohort value. We bring in a set of merchants in a given year. How much GMV, how much that set of merchants worth over the next three, four years to Shopify? And that's the most important thing that we want to focus on. And then that of course, from an efficiency standpoint, that of course meeting our payback guardrails and all of that. So that's the macro growth perspective. Cohort value over cost and payback. So that's the macro point of view.

(00:33:52):
And then within growth marketing, each channel operates with certain guardrails around their LTV CACs. Same thing for content and SEO. That operates with kind of a guardrail model for each piece of content. How much is that going to come back and down the line?

(00:34:09):
For growth products, it's also a combination of total GP incremental cohort value that's produced from those teams. So everything is basically going to be measured on from an experiment, ideally measured over a very long time period. What was the incremental cohort value lift that this generated? And that's how we think about and measure the impact of each of those sub teams along the way.

(00:34:40):
Each of those have a civic part of the funnel they play with. But because they're measured on absolutes and they really think about that absolute value, we don't get caught into, did your conversion rate over the course of this year go up or down? It's kind of irrelevant. What was the sum of the impact over a long period on that total cohort value that we're trying to produce from before merchants?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:01):
And the way you come up with this goal I imagine is you have a forecast of where things would go organically, and then here's the lift we want to see from the work this team does this quarter, this year.

Archie Abrams (00:35:12):
Correct. And then we're going to measure against for each experiment, did it actually get to where we expect that lift to be?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:21):
And those experiments again, are those all long-term holdout experiments where you look wait a year or some-

Archie Abrams (00:35:29):
We call. We call the experiment after three weeks, but in all cases, the group is held, we watch them. And that's where that ping comes back, every experiment is watched. And that ping comes back three, six months, 12 months to re-look at was this actually successful?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:42):
Okay, cool.

Archie Abrams (00:35:44):
So that creates the loop of shipping value quickly, but making sure we're holding ourselves accountable to did this actually produce results over a long period, or did it actually just have this neutral effect? It's like, oh, then we can learn from that and get better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:01):
This episode is brought to you by Dovetail, the AI-first customer insights hub for all teams. Dovetail has always been the go-to tool for teams who want to find insights in customer calls, user interviews, or documents. Now they've stepped it up with the release of Dovetail 3.0. That's three new products and a ton of AI features that make it faster and easier than ever before to truly get at the heart of what your customers want. You can get a real-time pulse on what your customers are thinking with Dovetail's, automated feedback analysis platform, channels, or full summaries and insights from every customer interaction your team has ever had with their AI chatbot ask Dovetail. You can even recruit from over 3 million participants directly in Dovetail.

(00:36:43):
All this is just the tip of the iceberg. Dovetail wants to give everyone in their organization instant access to their customers at any time. From roadmaps, discovery, to strategy sessions and more, it's never been easier to make customer-centric decisions.

(00:36:58):
The good news is Lenny's listeners can try Dovetail's Pro plan along with their newest products and features free for 30 days. Just go to dovetail.com/Lenny. 

(00:37:10):
So maybe just to dig into this again, because it's so interesting. Basically, product team ships stuff, they run an experiment, they see impact. Say it's 5% lift on something. Huzzah, you did it. Great work, performance review. Your exceeds, you're doing great. This team's killing it. And then a year later you realize, "Oh, that didn't last." How often do you find a team that is shipping wins looks back and ends up seeing, "That wasn't actually as successful as it." I know you said maybe it's a third of the time.

Archie Abrams (00:37:38):
30. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:39):
Yeah. Okay, so it's still roughly, yeah.

Archie Abrams (00:37:42):
And it's great learning and that's why we take it. It's like, wow, okay, now we really uncovered something and it's such a successful discovery. Wow, okay, we thought this thing. But now we learned it actually wasn't as true as we thought. Cool. What can we take from that and be smarter next time so we don't just double down on the wrong things?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:02):
That's so interesting. And again, and you mentioned most of the reason this is the case when something doesn't show lift down the road is it's pulling forward success that would've been seen later on its own if you had not even shipped this thing?

Archie Abrams (00:38:14):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:14):
Awesome. Is there an example by any chance that comes to mind of something like that that's just like, "Wow, that was a big win. And then oh I see we just pulled forward some revenue from the future."

Archie Abrams (00:38:25):
So I think one good example is something around payment failure notifications. So one of the things that a lot of teams have or see is we call Dunning effects where somebody might have a payment not go through, a credit card that doesn't go through. So we did a bunch of experimentation around, hey, how can we alert people that their credit card is failed, their payment attempt failed?

(00:38:47):
And that's a typical growth win, usually produces a lot of short-term impact. And that's what we saw here. We were doing much better alerting, reminding people, sending them a million emails about it. Cool, we got some pretty major lift.

(00:38:59):
You look back six, 12 months. There was really no long-term lift. And why is that? Because there's really a little bit of a selection bias there that people who were letting that payment fail probably weren't actually that dedicated to this entrepreneurship craft. They may have updated their credit card, but they still really weren't in it.

(00:39:22):
And so that was a good example of in a bunch of this stuff around payments, even "preventing" churn where you look, it's six, 12, 18 months. On a GMV metric, not a lot of lift over that long-term horizon.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:37):
I love this example. I could see so many people having run experiments like this and like, "Oh, we found such a huge win. This team's killing it. What a great idea. Of course this makes sense," and then turns out it's nothing long term.

Archie Abrams (00:39:54):
Which is great. We were going to spend a lot of time, okay, what else can we do here? It's like, no actually bigger fish to fry in a lot of other areas. So it helps the team just feel really good that their work is really the things that were good.

(00:40:13):
Another one that went the other way, which was really interesting was in our online store, and this might be if you use Shopify, we have sections and blocks that come pre-configured. And so we tested, okay, if we give you a pre-configured block of you should have an image up top, then a text banner, and then a collage with your products. That should help folks understand what to do when they're building the online store. It actually had no lift in people converting to a paying merchant. 

(00:40:48):
However, when we looked longer term on that six months later, it had a pretty massive impact on the number of people who were selling and producing GMV. And why is that? Because it didn't likely really influence anyone to buy Shopify or pay for Shopify. But the people who used it created better stores that were higher converting, and so they got early sales. They actually converted one of their visitors and they got momentum, and they stuck with entrepreneurship a little bit longer. And we saw that in that opposite way.

(00:41:21):
And so this is an example where that neutral, and so we tend to ship neutral. It's like it could be positive and so let's let it go if we have good intuition about it and it'll turn. So we've seen a bunch of these things go in very different directions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:36):
This is so fascinating. I didn't realize that you ship neutral experiments. That's an interesting insight. So it's like if you feel good about it and it's neutral, you ship it?

Archie Abrams (00:41:45):
In our culture of the kind of aim heavy, if the intuition is right that this probably is helping merchants, why do we start with that the original control is better if it's neutral? Let's start with, what would we have shipped if we were a blank slate? And if it's neutral, actually neither is better, so let's just pick the one we feel better about and ship that. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:03):
Makes so much sense. Oh man. Okay, so let's talk about this a little bit more. So this aim heavy concept, this idea of thinking 100 years out, can you just share more about that insight and that philosophy? I know it sounds like it comes from Tobi of how he likes to think about the business.

Archie Abrams (00:42:18):
Totally. It is all Tobi of really making sure Shopify is so oriented around, we are here to build 100 year company. And so the decisions we're going to make are really oriented towards the long-term success of merchants, of Shopify. Embedded in all of our principles are make the best product in the world, make money to do more of one. Never reverse principles two and three. In every kind of executive meeting, every town hall, that slide comes up. It's like you've been at Shopify, you've probably seen that slide 10,000 times. But it's an important reminder job is to build the best product for merchants over the long period of time. And then all of the metrics and the make money part of it, secondary to that. So what we care about is that long term piece. It ties a little bit to that original conversation about entrepreneurs and being the core of why we just want more people to start businesses and go.

(00:43:15):
It's very seductive I think in most companies, including in Shopify because we can support large enterprise businesses today, right? Big brands who want to get off an outdated solution and come over to Shopify. It's very easy to just say, "Oh, that's very concrete." There's an existing business, we want to have them come join Shopify. 

(00:43:40):
And in the short term it feels really good. It brings a lot of revenue right away. But if you're thinking about the long-term 100 years from now, guess what? All of the big brands of today be out of business. And many of them will be out of business in 30, 40, 50 years. The real success of Shopify is getting every business to start with us and go, but making that type of an investment and being so focused on that entrepreneur segment and making it easier is how we build a very, very long-term oriented company. So just even how we do capital investment, how we do product decision-making comes back to, hey, we can't chase the short-term. Even more concrete things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:24):
Is there an example that comes to mind where you did that where something short-term looked like, "We should definitely do this," but we're thinking thinking 100 years out so we're going to approach it this way?

Archie Abrams (00:44:35):
It's kind of very much just imbued in the culture. Almost everything kind of feels that way. And I'll give, practically speaking, every six weeks all the R&D group leads we get together and we sit with Tobi and each other and review every single project across the company. Every six weeks, every single R&D pull up the dashboard, and look at it.

(00:44:56):
And in that conversation, so much of the conversation is about both the technical how. How are we building this in a way that allows for Shopify to have optionality in the technical decisions that we are making? And I think for Tobi, one of the things I've learned and so is that how, the technical architecture determines strategy in a technology company even more than the what and who we're building for. If you build the right technical how and set yourself up to have a platform that can be adaptable, flexible, that is incredibly valuable over the long term. It means we will sometimes take longer to ship a feature. It means we'll not chase certain deals or what have you, but we're going to kind of make that investment. And it comes through in all of our reviews and just how we got to do our work together.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:53):
Wow, that is really unique. I've not heard of that where how... Usually it's the opposite. Let's not worry about how we're going to build this thing. It's why are we building this thing and then when are we building it? And not just the architecture is the most important thing.

Archie Abrams (00:46:09):
Yeah, I mean in the last one, it was great. We had a 30-minute discussion about how to build CSV importers for people coming over from different platforms, and it was all about are we using open source library, doing it internally, are we doing it in the core code base? Are we building a separate first party app to do it? It was incredible detail. 

(00:46:29):
This is what's amazing about Tobi. The technical detail of how we're going to do this was incredibly important to get right, to kind of set up this type of infrastructure. And most companies it'd be okay what, you're going to make it easier for people to migrate their data over. Cool. Team, go figure out how. And if team does figure out the how do we work on it with Tobi and the details, because the how is so important to how we build for the future.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:54):
That's fascinating. And usually it's how do we do this as quick as possible, because CVS importing is not our core differentiator. It'll just build something good enough, we'll ship it, we'll move on.

Archie Abrams (00:47:02):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:02):
Totally the opposite. That is fascinating. What's also really interesting about this is I think about Brian Chesky at Airbnb where I worked for a while and his... So one, he also had this idea of the 100-year vision and thinking for the future way out in 100 years. But interestingly, since he's a designer, he had a very different focus. So Tobi, he was an engineer. He still codes from what I can see on Twitter, he still-

Archie Abrams (00:47:24):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:26):
So I could see why his brain goes there and why he's really strong in the how. Brian on the other hand is very focused on the experience and making sure the design is amazing, and the app is exactly what he wants it to feel like. It is very experience oriented. So it's interesting that these founders lean into the thing that they're strong at, and understand deeply, and that ideally connects with the way this business specifically wins and grows. And it makes sense a platform, I could see why engineering would be so essential to get right. Travel, hospitality, consumer app. I could see why design is so important. 

Archie Abrams (00:48:03):
100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:04):
Fascinating. One more tidbit that I've heard about how you all think about this is metrics. And you mentioned before we started recording that a lot of the company doesn't actually have metrics that drive what they build, especially within the core business, which I think surprised a lot of people. Most people are like, "Every team needs a metric and a KPI, and this is how we measure progress and this is how we know if they're doing well." Talk about just how that works, how most of the companies doesn't have a metric.

Archie Abrams (00:48:31):
Yeah. It's funny, we ran against KPIs are basically banned as OKRs or banned and all that. And so certainly, in growth you have metrics, but they take a different form. And then in core, it truly is, do we have conviction that this is the right technical foundation to build the future of commerce? And that is built through certainly looking at data. So it's not that teams are not looking at data and using it as a piece of their puzzle, but it's not the overriding. And when we go to ship a feature in core, it's not like a team is held accountable for this metric over this six months. It's much more, did we ship the right thing? And we're going to kind of get at that through a variety of lenses. Could be some of that could be data, qualitative, just our own product sense of what's good or not.

(00:49:24):
And so I think the upside of that is I think we tend to ship things in core and that are incredibly forward-facing and we take more risk. I think to acknowledge some of the downside of it though is sometimes conversations get extremely subjective about what is the right thing to do. And so that requires the right way of having good discussions, openness from all leaders and from teams to debate those things. But it does result in some squishiness, which again has its pros and cons, but taste is what drives a lot of what we're shipping in core.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:05):
Yeah, I'm glad you touched on that. I was going to say, okay, everyone would love this idea of just build things that we think are awesome. It's going to be great. But then you build a whole org with teams and people building stuff. How does one know if they're building things that are good and helping versus not?

(00:50:21):
And you're pointing out there are pros and cons to that. The pros is we're not optimizing for some short-term wins and driving some poor metric. The con is you might ship stuff that... There's a lot of subjectivity, and people may not agree, and it's a lot of squishy stuff.

Archie Abrams (00:50:39):
Yeah, totally. Glen, who's heads of core product, I mean one of the things that's so impressive about Glen and that core team is they go incredibly deep into every single release that is shipped. And so you do have a central eye on the quality and how it all fits together.

(00:51:00):
And so that I think helps make sure there's a consistent kind of bar for taste. A bunch of folks Tobi obviously that can enforce that. So it's subjective, but it's objective in the sense that it's kind of a small number of people who really hold what that bar is and needs to be. I think if it's just subjective, let's just ship what we want without a couple people really holding that quality and that taste bar, that's where things go really sideways.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:31):
Awesome. That's exactly what I was going to ask is, who's the ultimate decider of taste and what is good? And so it sounds like basically Tobi above, and then he's kind of deputized Glen and relies on him to make a lot of these final calls. And then I imagine Glen has some folks that he kind of deputizes to make smaller decisions along the way. Or not, or he's very involved in everything.

Archie Abrams (00:51:55):
And I think this is the fun thing about Shopify. Literally we have our own internal project management system that's been kind of crafted just for Shopify and every shift-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:03):
What is that called by the way? It's got a cool name, right? 

Archie Abrams (00:52:06):
GSD. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:07):
GSD, yeah. [inaudible 00:52:10].

Archie Abrams (00:52:10):
Yeah, get it done.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:11):
That's what I remember.

Archie Abrams (00:52:12):
So get shit done. And every project, so you got a core project, you have emergency service, you got growth project. And the expectation is that the group leads. Every single project that goes out has a few minute video with Figmas and everything, and everything that shipped. Needs to be okay-toed, so approved by the group lead. There's nothing that can ship without that okay-to approval. And that okay-to approval has to be Glen, Carl, myself with different groups. And so that is how everything is reviewed. Now of course there's great amazing teams that do amazing work, but it is that that's how the system works.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:50):
And okay-to specifically means someone above reviews it or all this whole team, everyone looks at it?

Archie Abrams (00:52:56):
No. So Glen reviews the core stuff. Carl reviews the MS. Okay-to. It's interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:05):
It's basically Glen is founder mode and not as a founder where he's involved in all the details, has final say. So this is a really cool example of founder mode, but not as a founder.

Archie Abrams (00:53:15):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:16):
In the way you guys operate. And I imagine sometimes Tobi disagrees with Glen and then they talk about it and things get ironed out.

Archie Abrams (00:53:22):
Totally. And that's why we come together every six weeks, everyone in person to review every project so we can hash out those disagreements. Go through all the core projects, all the merge service projects, all the growth projects. And it's a great forum to say, "Hey, here's where we disagree," really on the how and the tactics of what's happening. And we can flag those things, have good debates about whether there might be misalignment.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:43):
Amazing. What a unique way of working. I'm so fascinated by all this. So what I'm hearing essentially within Core, Glen and his team come up with, "Here's what we're going to build the next quarter." You guys have twice a year releases, is that right? Or is it every season?

Archie Abrams (00:53:58):
Yeah, so big additions. Twice a year. Obviously continually shipping, but we package them twice a year in a big bang.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:05):
Big launch. Yep, I've seen those. Okay. So he's like, "Here's what we're going to do in the next release. We're just going to build this because we think this is right. And we're not driving a specific goal. We're building for 100 years in the future. Let's just build it." And basically you build it. He's like, "This is great, not great, iterate until it's this good," and then ship. And great. Okay, this is great. Okay, so then there's that team, and then there's your team, which is drive some freaking numbers, drive growth, hit these goals. How do you collaborate across these two teams? Do you have a model for how you work together? Because these feel like very different ways of working?

Archie Abrams (00:54:41):
Yeah, honestly, it's been one of the things I'm very proud of. We built a really great partnership for the last three and a half years, because it's intentionally meant to be almost at odds, and that's part of the structure of how we want to work.

(00:54:56):
But it comes from, I think, a place of respect on both sides. And I'd say for anyone, it's okay, here's what growth is going to do. We're going to do it in a way that is high quality, that is shipping really good stuff for merchants. We're probably going to approach it in a faster way. We might disagree on things, but we're going to have reasonable paths to handle that conflict.

(00:55:17):
And so while there's no magic bullet, it wasn't like these are the surfaces that growth can touch, these are not. It was like you can go anywhere in the product, but let's go figure out how to work together to figure out that quality bar to understand when you're going to be different on it, on the quality bar to get something out to learn, and just building trust along the way that we're actually going to ship high quality things and we ship it to 100% and move. And so a lot of great work on the team to make those relationships really strong.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:47):
Got it. So basically, you guys are like, "Moving this button over here is going to drive so much growth," and then Glen's like, "No, this is not acceptable. We don't want a button here. This looks terrible. Everyone's going to hate it." So that's the healthy tension. I'm describing a combative-

Archie Abrams (00:56:01):
[inaudible 00:56:01] totally. And it's like, okay, so how are we going to work to figure this out? It might be, "Hey, we're going to move the button. Hey let's run the test," but see the short-term lift. You know we're going to monitor it long term. You know when we ship it, it's going to be high quality, high quality polish. And you trust us to make those trade-offs.

(00:56:19):
I wish I had a better answer of it's very human. It's very that trust that's that's very important in any of these. I think growth with other teams is like, there's no replacement for just the human trust and then following through on commitments of no, we are actually going to make this thing really good. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:38):
Is there an example of that, that comes to mind where you had something that was you thought was going to drive meaningful growth? You showed it to Glenn, he is like, "No, don't know about this." And then either you iterated or you just forget it, this isn't right for the platform even though it's going to drive some meaningful growth?

Archie Abrams (00:56:54):
The place that we often come back to is, and this is with I think Tobi is great, Tobi and Glen, is on wizards. So wizards-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:07):
Onboarding carousels.

Archie Abrams (00:57:08):
Onboarding carousels. Some way that basically has folks get set up by not using the actual product. And so we've always kind of danced around and we have very specific no wizard principle, but I think that sometimes the tension is wizards can serve a purpose in certain circumstances, but we've avoided doing that. But we've always worked to try to make the principles of what a wizard does really well, which is it simplifies the product into something that allows people to have a lower bar, to try to work with core to bring that into the actual experience itself.

(00:57:52):
So the example of that experiment I mentioned to you of giving pre-filled sections in the online store editor, you could have solved that in a wizardy way of, "Enter a few things, and we're going to generate these sections for you." Instead, we actually took those pre-generated things based on what we know about you and put it into the actual project experience itself.

(00:58:15):
So it tried to get at some of the principles of what a wizard can do well without avoiding the wizard principle, without creating actual wizard. So that's been some of the, how do we work together to get the intent of what the growth ideas but in a way that's consistent with the way we want to build in core?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:34):
Got it. And I get why that you think about this a lot because you talked about one of the biggest levers is onboarding and helping more people get activated, and so I could see why you spent a lot of time thinking about how do we help more people succeed there.

Archie Abrams (00:58:46):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:48):
I want to ask your insight on this idea that people might be listening to this and feeling like, "Oh, we need to build a team that just builds great product and is not constrained by metrics and driving growth." Short-term thinking, long-term thinking, 100 years. This is inspiring I think to a lot of companies because the sounds great.

(00:59:08):
What do you think it takes to make something like that work? Because in a bad case, this team just sits around and builds whatever they want, and the rest of the company's like, "God damn, this sucks. I have to show success in metrics and moving a metric in this team, over there just build beautiful things." Is it like you need a founder like Tobi, that prioritizes this and values it and has a very good taste and intuition? What do you think are important elements of something like that, of this approach working at a company based on what you've seen?

Archie Abrams (00:59:37):
Yeah, I think it needs to have a very opinionated founder set of people who are driving what good looks like. And I think Shopify a few years ago and before maybe sometimes drifted into the mode of, "We are just going to build stuff and each kind of team is just going to build stuff not really accountable for it," and that is a very, very bad state to end up. So I think you either have to use, my sense is metrics as accountability, which is the most common kind of way to drive accountability and focus. Or extremely strong founder or set of folks who have extremely strong opinions on what good is and what taste is. If you have one of those two, you can make it work, but the worst case is let's just go build a bunch of cool stuff in kind of a haphazard way. That I don't think would work.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:30):
Yeah, this is great. So either you need metrics to tell you you're doing the right thing or really correct and good taste in your founder.

Archie Abrams (01:00:42):
Correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:42):
Cool. I think that's a really good way of... And I imagine every founder is going to think, "Oh, that's me. I have this, I can do this." I think it's rare in real life. It's rare that you're like a Tobi, or Brian Chesky, or Elon.

Archie Abrams (01:00:43):
100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:57):
Yeah. It's hard to internalize that, but I think that's the reality. So most people will be more successful building things that are driving metrics they can track in an experiment. 

Archie Abrams (01:01:07):
Yes. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:08):
Awesome. This is very fascinating. I'm so happy we're spending so much time on this. Okay, there's a few other random things I'm going to touch on. One is sales. So historically, Shopify has been very product-like growth, very organic. Go check it out, sign up, shop a store, start a store, grow. And you guys have layered on sales. In a sales motion that's an increasing part of your business. What have you learned about your team, the growth team working with sales and making that a successful relationship?

Archie Abrams (01:01:36):
Yeah, no, it has been great over the last couple of years as built out, the sales order has added a whole new kind of motion to Shopify. As Shopify's product got better, it can serve the biggest companies in the world. It's like the natural evolution. Well what are you going to do that for people to grow up on Shopify and to be the biggest companies, but we're also going to take folks another platform, bring them over.

(01:01:57):
For growth in sales, I think the biggest learning from the the R&D side at least has been the scale is very different with sales, and so it's really hard to use as much quantitative data to make growth, to make some of those decisions. 

(01:02:18):
And so a lot of it has been building much more qualitative insights working with merchant success, sales about the challenges they're facing and onboarding a large customer. So how do we build import tools that work for them? How do we make sure they have the right guidance in the product for a very different set of use cases? So a lot of it has just been very much empathy building with sales about what that merchant journey looks like, and quite frankly challenging ourselves to think differently. It's been one thing.

(01:02:49):
And then second, we kind of built two very distinct funnels for a little bit. There's a sales funnel. You come in, you contact us, that's it. There's no mention of self-service, there's no this. There's just drive MQLs, boom. Then there's the self-service thing. There's no mention of sales anywhere. 

(01:03:05):
So one of the last thing the year, last year we've been really doing is how do we create these hyper journeys where there is... We shouldn't force the merchant to choose, do you want to talk to sales? You want to do self-service? Should give them the options, whatever path that they want to go on.

(01:03:19):
And so a lot of that has been building into the self-service journey over to sales and then from sales into self-service. That's broken a lot of metrics in the business. That's broken a lot of ways people have thought about their jobs, and so there's been a lot of cultural resetting and just getting smarter from a metric standpoint about, how do we measure this thing of hybrid journey? They came in via self-service, they went over to sales. How do we value each of those components in the process? And transparently, that's something we're still getting better at, but it's really important to get there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:55):
Is there an example of something that broke that would be illustrative of what you're describing?

Archie Abrams (01:04:01):
Yeah. So I think that breaks is drive someone from an ad over to self-service. We typically look at only the self-service LTV of that person. But what happens if they come in, they sign up via self-service and then they go talk to sales? They get changed to a sales driven merchant, which means that that value of that merchant, which is usually actually quite large, does not get associated back to that ad campaign. Oh, guess what that means? That means you would probably reduce investment on that ad campaign because you weren't valuing that. Our system had two different models for calculating LTV. Sales driven one, and a self-service one. Uh oh, we're going to make suboptimal investment decisions now by kind of moving things around even though it's the right thing to do.

(01:04:55):
So a lot of it's in rebuilding all instrumentation, how we do LTV modeling, how we do attribution, how we do incrementality testing across each of those different types of outcomes, because it was not an intuitive thing for us originally because we had built all of these systems with a much more siloed view.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:16):
Yeah, basically attribution gets a lot more complicated. Are you going in a multi-touch attribution direction or is there something even more clever?

Archie Abrams (01:05:26):
My rant is I am... Multi-touch attribution as its place. I think ideally what we want to get through is what we really care about is incrementality. So incrementality is kind of the gold standards, for people who are less like attribution measure is, how do you assign value to a given touch point, right? Click, a view, etc. But it doesn't tell you causally what drove something. That's where incrementality tells you. Incrementality test is basically don't show ads on meta for certain number of people. Show it to the other set, see what the lift is and the outcome.

(01:06:04):
A lot of what we're doing is trying to get a lot, is continuing to get even more sophisticated in incrementality measurement for not just self-serve outcomes, but for self-service outcomes that then drive to sales for sales specific outcomes. And as soon as we have that kind of incrementality at the channel level, we can get a lot more sophisticated in terms of our bidding, budgeting, and all of that. But that's really the key thing we want to get to.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:35):
There's certain topics that alone can be their own podcast conversation to just dive deep into this stuff. But I'm going to stop myself and I'll go further down that track. Let me touch on a couple more things before I let you go.

(01:06:46):
One is marketing. So we talked about sales, marketing. You guys don't have a CMO, there's no Shopify CMO. Instead you embed marketing leads within the org. For folks that are trying to grapple with that, should we hire CMO? Should we do something else? What have you learned about maybe the benefits and also maybe some downsides of approaching it the way you guys have approached it?

Archie Abrams (01:07:07):
The benefit is, so there's growth marketing who sits in growth, there's revenue marketing who sits over closer to sales. There's a brand team under Harley who does amazing work. Our president. There's marketing embedded in core and PMM, sit with the product managers there. There's shop marketing on a consumer side. So marketing is truly everywhere in the org.

(01:07:28):
And I think the benefit of it is it's closest to the primary goal that those marketers are trying to do. They sit with growth so we can focus on that self-service motion. Harley is an amazing communicator, so brand sits with him so he can have a lot of influence over that. And so I think it sits with the people its most relevant outcomes are driving, which is great. It allows us move faster with less kind of coordination. 

(01:07:58):
I think it only works because Tobi and Harley has such amazing intuition on what the brand is, needs to be, and all of that. Some of what the CMO does of kind of creating the cohesive story of Shopify it held in their heads and they have the pen on that. 

(01:08:19):
And so that allows then, that piece of that CMO's job to not be as important at Shopify. But the other pieces are obviously critical, but they can be now closer to the action and where they're going to drive the most impact. The downside is things are sometimes very messy. So that's...

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:40):
It's another example where the founder, their background and interest in skills can impact significantly the way the work is structured and who you hire and don't hire. Okay, one last question. Totally different topic, discounting. So you worked at Udemy for a long time. And from what I understand, discounting was one of the key reasons Udemy succeeded and one of the big differentiators. I'm curious what you learned about discounting, the power of discounting as a growth lever.

Archie Abrams (01:09:09):
Yeah, so Udemy is a very an online marketplace for online courses. So come on course. And I think what was happening in I started, and we were there 2012-ish was people were like, "What is this online course thing? I don't really understand what it is. I don't understand what the value is and what I'm willing to pay."

(01:09:30):
And so what discounting has a really powerful effect on is it can signal value with a high list price, but then bring something down to an affordable price. And that may seem like of course that's obvious, but in online courses what was important is the list price would be high at 100 bucks. So it's associated with a college course. But what people really value this thing as was a book.

(01:09:54):
And so you could signal very high, signal quality through price, which was very murky at that point in online learning. Signal value through price. Discount it to 10 bucks, or that was a typical Udemy deal. And then so 99% off, 90% off. We might see fire sales, but it changed the value in willingness to pay and then it tapped into the fact that, and still is education is very aspirational.

(01:10:23):
And so what a lot of people missed in education is yes, we want people to actually take the course, but that's actually in many cases not the job to be done. That there's an emotional job that's even more important, which is I'm feeling like I'm making progress in my educational journey, and just the act of purchasing a course or the act of buying a book is progress.

(01:10:47):
And so if you can make it very enticing, very high value thing, cheap, urgency, you can let people make that emotional journey by the act of purchasing, which then allowed us to actually have very good retention. Because you could keep coming back to that emotional job over and over again, which just counting with urgency allowed us to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:10):
Amazing. Well with that, we reached our very exciting lightning round. Archie, are you ready?

Archie Abrams (01:11:15):
I'm ready. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:17):
First question, what are two or three books that you recommended most to other people?

Archie Abrams (01:11:21):
So one, I love to go back to marketers who wrote in the 1920s. And so one that I love is Scientific Advertising by Claude Hopkins. So it's basically one of the first direct marketers that came out and he innovated on some of the concepts of copywriting and just how you sell a product around can't make this product, can't sell the product, can you tell the product will help the customer achieve their goals? And so it's really fun. I find it really fun to go back in time, because there's a lot of really good first principles thinking that I think we've actually lost in more modern stuff where it's like personalization band, it's optimization, all this stuff. Where it's like how do you actually write and sell things really effectively? Scientific Advertising, it's a great book.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:09):
It's just like the name alone, it sounds really cool. Especially for someone in your shoes that feels like the perfect book for your role. And I think there's so much wisdom in just the thing someone figured out many years ago about what convinces people to buy something is still true and people overcomplicate it. Just going back to the original is often really useful.

Archie Abrams (01:12:28):
Totally. And The Perfect Mile about the chase for sub four minute mile by Roger Bannister and a few other folks is just a wonderful... As a runner, it's a really fun book to read about perseverance, how these folks really, they all competed to get to that really amazing goal of under four minutes in a mile.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:52):
Awesome. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Archie Abrams (01:12:58):
I went back in time and I watched for the first time actually the entire season or all the episodes of The Sopranos, which was quite fun. Highly recommend. I did that in The Wire in the last six months.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:13):
It's a lot of watching.

Archie Abrams (01:13:14):
It's a lot watching. Work out in the morning on my elliptical or bike, so it's a nice-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:20):
That's smart-

Archie Abrams (01:13:21):
Workout show.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:22):
That's a good motivator to just work out out something. I got to watch the next episode. The Wire, it's hour long episodes and five seasons times 20. I think it's 22 episodes per season, right? 

Archie Abrams (01:13:32):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:33):
Oh geez. It's a lot of watching and I did that once and I was like, "I've got a lot of episodes to watch," but incredible. Okay. It's funny you should say The Sopranos. I feel like a number of people recently told me they're watching the full Sopranos again. It's like a trend recently for some reason.

Archie Abrams (01:13:50):
Oh, interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:51):
Anyway, do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Archie Abrams (01:13:54):
So the AI music creator. My kids and I... I'm the least musical person in the world and it's been amazing. My kids and I will create songs together about our days, about what's going on. So it's just been really fun to be able to have a musical experience for a non-musical person, and have that creative experience for them and it's been really awesome to use. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:15):
Suno is Insane. I think it's Suno.ai, folks want to check it out. It's just such a fun party trick too, just to write a song on the spot about something that you're thinking about. Awesome. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, find helpful and worker life?

Archie Abrams (01:14:31):
Yeah, I often come back to the plan is the plan until it's not. And it's basically like we have a plan. It's the plan, it's our best, let's commit to it. But acknowledge it might change and we'll deal with it then. But if the combination of we have a plan, stay focused on that, with also the acknowledgement that you need to be flexible, and try to combine those two sometimes contradictory things of focus plan with we got to be able to react in an effective way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:01):
Reminds me of strong opinions loosely held as a concept.

Archie Abrams (01:15:07):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:08):
Awesome. Okay, final question. So I asked your wife what to ask you when you came on this podcast and she suggested that I ask you about your late father who had a lot of impact on your leadership style. So here's my question, what did you learn from your dad that impacts the way you work today?

Archie Abrams (01:15:26):
Yeah. My dad a lot is a father, and he was an entrepreneur in technology. And I think one of the things that I so appreciate about his leadership style was the empathy, and curiosity, and kindness that he showed in everything. And I hope in some of the stories that of him, it's like no matter who anyone was, curious, love to engage and learn from. And I hope that's something that I try to take inspiration from is just be with everyone kind and learn from everyone you're with and around. So something I think about a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:08):
That super resonates. He sounds like a wonderful human as are you. Archie, this was wonderful. We touched on so much. We covered so much. I feel like we could go on for many more hours. Maybe we'll do round two as you learn more things at your time at Shopify. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to potentially reach out or follow the stuff you're up to, and how can listeners be useful to you? 

Archie Abrams (01:16:30):
So not super on social media. But on LinkedIn, check me out, send me a message. And then yeah, if folks are hiring a bunch of folks, growth marketers, PMs, engineers, data folks, UXers, you want to work at Shopify and growth or other parts? Fully remote. So we'd love to have great people join.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:54):
Awesome. And that last point, I think I'll just highlight one of the few remaining fully remote tech companies that is not returning to work. Returning to the office [inaudible 01:17:05] work. Definitely work.

Archie Abrams (01:17:07):
Yes. Yes. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:09):
Amazing. And sounds like basically you're hiring across all functions.

Archie Abrams (01:17:12):
All functions.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:13):
Perfect. Archie, thank you so much for being here.

Archie Abrams (01:17:17):
Thank you Lenny, it was fun. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:19):
Bye everyone.

(01:17:21):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Austin Hay (00:00:00):
From 2010 to 2020, we had the golden years of deterministic matching where it was very easy to run an ad and understand with precision who installed the app. Maybe you didn't know their name, but you actually would know their IDFA and you could tie that to their PII. You can't do that anymore. So, what that means is these ad networks are becoming more complex, sophisticated, and interesting, right at the same time that it's harder for marketers to really understand how they're spending money. And so I am paying a lot of attention to how marketers make decisions with probabilistic data because most of the work that I'm doing now is actually saying, well, given that we don't have determinist data about a per certain audience or where somebody came from, how can I find other information that will create a model for 30% of the population and we can use that to extrapolate to a hundred.

Lenny (00:00:52):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview you world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hardwood experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Austin Hay. Austin is one of the smartest people in the world on the field of MarTech, aka Marketing Technology. He's advised companies like Notion, Airbnb, Walmart, Postmates, Robinhood, even Pete's Coffee and Mars on their MarTech strategy and tactics. He's currently head of marketing technology at Ramp. Before that, he was VP of business operations at Runway. Before that, he was VP of growth at mParticle and the fourth employee at the Unicorn Branch Metrics. He's also a teacher at Reforge on this very topic of MarTech. In our conversation, Austin explains what exactly is MarTech, how it fits into your growth organization when you need to hire a MarTech person and what to look for plus his favorite interview questions.

(00:01:43):
Also, his favorite tools, frameworks, team structures, and emerging platforms that he's most excited about. This episode is for anyone who's responsible for growth and is curious about ways to optimize your approach and how marketing technology fits into that. Enjoy this episode with Austin Hay after a short word from our sponsors. Today's episode is brought to you by OneSchema, the embeddable CSV importer for SaaS. Customers always seem to want to give you their data in the messiest possible CSV file. And building a spreadsheet importer becomes a never ending sync for your engineering and support resources. You keep adding features to your spreadsheet importer, but customers keep running into issues. Six months later, you're fixing yet another date conversion edge case bug. Most tools aren't built for handling messy data, but OneSchema is.

(00:02:28):
Companies like Scale AI and PAVE are using OneSchema to make it fast and easy to launch delightful spreadsheet import experiences from embeddable CSV import to importing CSVs from an SFTP folder on a recurring basis. Spreadsheet import is such an awful experience in so many products. Customers get frustrated by useless messages like error on line 53 and never end up getting started with your product. OneSchema intelligently corrects messy data so that your customers don't have to spend hours in Excel just to get started with your product.

(00:02:59):
For listeners of this podcast, OneSchema is offering a $1,000 discount. Learn more at oneschema.co/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel. Get deep insights into what your users are doing at every stage of the funnel at a fair price that scales as you grow. Mixpanel gives you quick answers about your users from awareness to acquisition through retention, and by capturing website activity, ad data, and multi-touch attribution, right in Mixpanel, you can improve every aspect of the full user funnel. Powered by first party behavioral data instead of third party cookies. Mixpanel is built to be more powerful and easier to use than Google Analytics. Explore plans for teams of every size and see what Mixpanel can do for you at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny. And while you're at it, they're also hiring. So, check it out at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny. Austin, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Austin Hay (00:04:03):
Lenny. Thank you so much for having me.

Lenny (00:04:04):
We are going to get super nerdy today and we're going to dive deep into the very cool field of MarTech. How excited are you about us chatting about MarTech?

Austin Hay (00:04:15):
I'm so excited. Because it seems like you might be one of the first people in product and growth to talk about MarTech.

Lenny (00:04:21):
Wow, okay. That makes me even more excited. Yeah, it's something that I haven't fully understood and so I'm excited to dig real deep. So, let's start with just the basics. What exactly is MarTech and then what does someone who is in MarTech do?

Austin Hay (00:04:35):
Such a good question. Because marketing technology is like this very amorphous, cross-functional discipline that lives at the crossroads of product and growth and engineering and marketing. It brings together processes and systems from a wide range of disciplines. And I think really the way to think about marketing technology is it's a product manager whose specific role and focus is the system or the third party or first party platform because marketing technology can mean a collection of third party tools, which is a lot of people think, but as a company scales and grows actually it could include a collection of first party homegrown solutions that you build yourself with or in addition to third party. So, I like to think about marketing technology more as one piece is people and process and the other is the system and the platform. And that probably sounds pretty familiar to what a lot of product people think about their world as, and that's how I define MarTech.

(00:05:31):
And then you asked this other question around what exactly the role of somebody in MarTech, and maybe we'll talk about this a little later, but it's such a function of the size and the stage of the company that you're at. At Airbnb, I would say Dmitri who you might've worked with was the MarTech guide. He managed a lot of our Airbnb's, the first and third party tools. Airbnb at that size was, I don't know, maybe 800 people or so. And so it makes sense to have a function with product and engineering resources. A small startup for example, when I was working with Siqi, we were just talking about this at Runway, there was no such thing as MarTech. There was me and Tanner and Siqi standing up tools and using them because you just have to use the tools to get the job done. And so I would say on the spectrum of what is MarTech, you really have to look at the size and the stages of the company and as you grow you start to see it become more refined or pronounced.

Lenny (00:06:17):
So, if someone listening to this that has done growth or has a growth PM may be like, oh, but this is sort of what I do. What is the difference between someone that just runs growth or has a growth team versus someone that's specifically a MarTech person?

Austin Hay (00:06:30):
At some levels there's maybe no difference. There's a lot of startups I would say are 30 people or less where you have a growth team and your growth acquisition person is using a CDP to send data to their ad network to run their ads because that's part of their job and maybe they are the MarTech person. And actually you find a lot of people who consider themselves MarTech professionals now having started in growth or user acquisition roles because they had to just use tools in order to get their jobs done. But what I would say is as a company grows and scales, it moves from being a community or village driven aspect of your products to being something that's centrally owned. If you're a startup, again, like 30 to 40 people, everybody might chip in to manage your CDP or use Amplitude or build a first party solution on top of those.

(00:07:16):
It's a mixture of first and third party tools and engineering and product and marketing all work together on it. That doesn't scale though. As you cross a hundred to 200 people, somebody has to be responsible for knowing how data flows through tools, how it's worked, what's the schema. And that's not even considering procurement and legal stuff. You have infinite liability if you don't manage your contracts well. And so usually around I would call it a hundred to 150 people is the critical mass where you can't just have a village approach to systems and tools much like in the IT org, if it was a village approach to SSO businesses would be in a lot of danger. That's where you typically start to see the question of, all right, we need a systems and tools person. We need somebody to manage these systems and manage that platform.

(00:08:01):
And there's a variety of ways it can go. I've seen it go just into pure product that's with a product operations org and a product ops person actually will manage a lot of third and first party tools. I've seen it go into the IT org, Walmart for example, at a really big scale. They had a MarProd function which was marketing products. It was product within the marketing function or product that was designed to serve marketing. And then of course you can have more traditional routes like you can have marketing technology as a single standalone unit or business technology as a standalone unit. Some of this depends too on whether the business is B2C versus B2B. Classically in a B2B business you see it in rev ops or some types of systems role because you have to serve not only users coming into your funnel, but then the businesses that you're serving afterwards.

(00:08:46):
That's also where you typically see tools like Salesforce coming into play and more advanced CRMs. In a B2C business, your user funnel is actually really simple acquiring users and you're getting them into your product and then product is taking them over. There's no additional CRM, so usually your CDP is the source of truth and that's where you might actually see marketing technology fit in with growth a lot more. Just some examples like at Postmates, I worked for them for a long time as a consultant. Marketing technology was just part of growth. We had a director of growth even before that, Siqi Chen who's the CEO of runway, and I guess you were his first manager as I just learned, he was the first VP of growth and marketing technology was just part of growth and product owned that as a system.

(00:09:30):
As a different example though, at Ramp we're big enough and we're a B2B company, but we have a B2C top of funnel where we try to acquire users and get them to fill out our application to get a credit card. We have a distinct revenue operations team that's broken into business technology and marketing technology. So, there's lots of flavors of how it can exist. I think that's kind of the interesting and fun part of Marketing Tech is that it's not just one single version of the world that you apply to many companies, there's like a million variations that I've seen and they all kind of look to solve the same problem.

Lenny (00:10:00):
So, to make it even more specific and really simple for people to think about what someone in MarTech does, essentially it's using technology and tools to drive growth. Is that a simple way of thinking about this one specific roles?

Austin Hay (00:10:11):
Totally. That's exactly right. And I have this adage I always say, which is tools are just meant to solve problems. And the problem set for marketing technologists and business technologists is you focus on the tools.

Lenny (00:10:24):
And so when someone currently say listening doesn't have a MarTech person and they're thinking about, hey, is this a gap we have? What is that slice of work that a MarTech person would take if they currently have say a growth team or a growth PM that's leading growth and a growth team around them?

Austin Hay (00:10:40):
This comes up all the time, by the way, I talk to businesses every year that have this problem of we have a growth team, we're growing pretty fast. We have a guy that we hired, usually an engineer who stood up all these tools for us. Or it could be gal too just to be clear, but this person has been here for two years and knows all of our systems really well, but now they're becoming overwhelmed. They don't have enough time. The systems are too complex. This is the flavor of story that I hear so often around startups who have hired a great growth person and managed tools and systems, but at some point they reach that point in time where it's no longer manageable by one person or even a set of people. And that slice of works looks like setting up new tools, building new tools on top of them because a lot of times you'll take a third party tool, call it like a segment or an amplitude, and you'll build tooling in your own stack behind it to power something much more advanced.

(00:11:35):
And everybody thinks that marketing technology is just the third party tools, but actually it's designing, architecting and building that stuff on top of your third party tools. That's how you actually have a lot of velocity is thinking about not just build versus buy. It's build and buy now. So, you buy the tool to get 90% of the way there and then you build the cool thing on top with the other 10%. And so that architecting decision usually falls on this person. The one really unsexy part of it, which I tend to love because it's really high leverage is the contract part. When you start out as a business, you sign any contract you want with a third party because you're just trying to get going. You have much bigger problems, product market fit, staying alive, runway. But at some point as you scale and you're starting to make money, now you start to care more about not just how much money you're making but how much money you're losing usually from contrasting SaaS tools.

(00:12:24):
And so that's where you start to have more scrutiny around what types of deals are we signing, what are the terms? Do we have liability exposure? What's it going to cost us if we actually scale? And it's great that we have this cool rate at 500 MTUs, what happens when we have a million MPUs? So, I worked at mParticle, which was a CDP provider for a long time and I was their VP of growth and part of their SaaS vendor strategy is like, how can we design these cost structures in a way so that at the company scales we make more money? That's just part of the business. And so if you have that mindset of, well, I'm looking out for the business not just now, but two 30 years in the future, that's where you can also have a lot of value from a systems or marketing technologist.

Lenny (00:13:05):
Maybe a sign that you should start thinking about a MarTech person on a growth team is what I'm hearing is you're starting to accumulate all these different tools and maybe there's a sense that you could be a lot more efficient in connecting data and the backend infrastructure for how you think about growth and how you drive growth and measure growth.

Austin Hay (00:13:24):
Yeah, efficiency and pain. I would say pain drives people more. It's like, hey, we can't do something because nobody knows this thing. We can't do something because we don't know the best way to set up these tools or to change these tools or we can't even move forward where a business plan because we're worried that changing our tools might have an impact. And usually this is related to email marketing tools and data tools, so like CDPs and folks like Braze interval and just because a lot of times your email is the thing driving recurring customers to come back to your product and use it. So, you can't actually sometimes make the changes you want without understanding how something was set up in the first place.

Lenny (00:14:03):
You talked about where this person would live in the organization. There's all these different places. I talked about revenue team, maybe the ops team, maybe growth team, marketing team. What's your general advice for who should lead the hiring of this role and also just roughly who should they report to?

Austin Hay (00:14:21):
So, I have not to shamelessly plug my Reforge course in the fall, but I'm going to be shamelessly plug my Reforge course in the fall. We have this awesome matrix that we built that shows where this person should live, what they do, who they should report into, and it's all part of the fall course if you want like the deep dive into it. There's going to be a section on it, but just the gist of it is I first like to break it down into two dimensions. First is a B2C company or B2B company. And then the second dimension is how important is it to you that this person report into a specific function or not? So, first with B2C and really maybe a simpler version of that is centralized versus decentralized. So, we have B2C, B2B, centralized, decentralized. In a B2C organization I think actually thinks it's quite simple.

(00:15:08):
Most of the time your tools, your marketing tools are intended to help the growth team. The growth team has a job to be done, which is to spur user growth and tools are just meant to solve the problem. So, marketing technology's job is to serve the growth team. Now it obviously serves product and analytics and data, but its key stakeholder and customer is the marketing or growth function. And so I think it makes a lot of sense that if you're designing an org under a CMO or a marketing person, you put marketing technology alongside your head of growth or maybe reporting into your head of growth depending on the seniority of the person. And that works quite well. The key thing there is you just want to make sure that this marketing technology person is a really strong technical architect or some type of technical operator because they're going to be your representation to the product in engineering orgs.

(00:15:53):
Now, some people take a little bit of a slight twist on that. They say, hey, I have a product manager who manages growth that comes from the PM side. You could have a platform PM that serves the same thing in MarTech and they're responsible for all internal platform systems. And then you get into questions of does that belong in product ops or not? And I'm not going to go there. But for B2C, that's the centralized function. For B2C decentralized, what you do instead is you just say like, hey, we're going to have one of these systems, people in every org. Product is going to have a product ops person and growth is going to have a growth ops person, engineering will have engineering ops, and then we kind of divide the lines based on what tools they're managing. I generally don't see that working very well just because as you add more operational people, it just creates more systems.

(00:16:39):
And so unless you're a massive company where you need that type of scale, I think most startups should avoid that decentralized model. And then for B2B, I think B2B is really messy because not only do you have pure B2B where you're only selling to enterprises, but you have this concept of B2B2C, which is where you're actually selling to users and to businesses sometimes at the top of the funnel and the bottom, but also sometimes at the same time like notion. Notion sells to users so, they have a little growth acquisition funnel at the top, but then they also sell to businesses. And I find there's really, again, there's two ways decentralized or centralized actually at Ramp we've gone back and forth between the two models. We started centralized with the Rev ops group, we decentralized it and put marketing technology into the CMO org and now we're rolling it back into the revenue operations org Largely has to do with who is our customer?

(00:17:28):
Whose problems are we solving and where are resources allocated? Because if you have a decentralized model, then you run the risk of having to have lots of resources decentralized across the team. And the question is, can that function actually get work done or resources spread too thin and the priorities on align that it makes it challenging to get work done. And yeah, I would just say especially on B2B, for people out there listening, there is no right answer. And I even think that marketing technology could live in product, it could also live in engineering. Some of this has to do with who is the leader of this function. If it blends more towards ops, meaning managing processes and systems, then yeah, maybe you want to decentralize it and keep it in its representative function. If you have a really technical leader who was an architect or a PM that might indicate where that person should actually be leading their team. So, it's very case specific, which I know is a terrible answer, but it's the way it is.

Lenny (00:18:25):
Makes total sense. If someone were to hire someone like in Austin, are you doing the work yourself? Are you an IC for quite a while or do you end up building a team, say engineers that are building some of this infrastructure, how does that usually play out?

Austin Hay (00:18:38):
I think all marketing technologists at some level are ICs. I think it's a great job personally, because I get to be an IC and a manager. You have to be an IC in that, you are the most senior technical expert on all first party and third party systems. So, you have to know really well how third party tools work and you don't know that without doing the work yourself. So, I do find that some of the best marketing technologists have at least at some point in the last five years, been an operator and expert managing tools and systems. And then usually the teams are small and super cross-functional.

(00:19:10):
So, what I would say is more important to look for than how many people has this person managed is how well can they manage upward, laterally and downward because they're going to have to go talk to the head of rev ops if they want to change something in Salesforce, they're going to have to talk to the VP of product if they want to make a big platform change that touches something else. They're going to be relying constantly on data resources from their head of data. So, I think that this person, the secret sauce is more of how good of a cross-functional team player are they. I almost view them like a true quarterback every [inaudible 00:19:41] says people are quarterbacks. But really marketing technology because it lives between so many departments, it plays that role of having to call plays and pull on different departments.

Lenny (00:19:50):
And because it sounds like you don't have a team to do some of these things and you need to convince people to help you out.

Austin Hay (00:19:56):
Totally. Yeah. It's a game of persuasion and salesmanship. You have to convince people why the problems are big and especially as you get bigger, a lot of the decisions or problems of marketing technology are not about rapidly making a huge transformation. It's slow transformation that can have big implications. I'll just give you one example. Like lots of big companies I talked to have two CDPs or two attribution tools and it's like there's the cost problem. How do we get rid of this secondary tool to reduce the cost? Maybe it's a million dollars, but there's also the complexity and decision-making problem. How do we make people move and work faster by not having the complexity of asking, which tool do I use in such a simple decision?

(00:20:39):
And then you get to a really big scale at Walmart where your problem isn't even. How do we consolidate the stack and make it so tools that are helpful for people, but how do we prevent from getting back to that state? How do we put safeguards in place to make sure people actually have access to the tools that they want and can solve their problems? But we're not introducing duplicative tech into our organization because a really well-known, sorry to put SaaS vendors on the spot here, but well-known SaaS vendor plays the land and expand motion. You get in small and then you grow your business. Well, that's a distinct problem for businesses that are trying to control costs and simplify the way the world works.

Lenny (00:21:15):
I want to talk about tools that you recommend and use most often, but I'm thinking maybe we start with a different question, which is around just what does your day look like as a MarTech person? What are you doing day to day and from the lens of your growth PM listening or a leader listening and what could this person do for me and how much leverage can I get if I were to find a MarTech person?

Austin Hay (00:21:37):
There's half of marketing technology, which I would call somewhat administrative and high leverage. It's managing PI requests and PI technology, managing administrative stuff like contracts and admittance to tools and permissions. This is all at a big company scale. You probably don't do this when you're a small company, but that stuff matters because give you an example, you give edit access to somebody who wants HubSpot and they send a fake email test to a million people and now you're on Twitter being embarrassed as a company. It's like-

Lenny (00:22:12):
Does that happen to you?

Austin Hay (00:22:13):
It hasn't happen to me. But I've gotten the emails from certain companies where it's like, this is a test and it came from an intern.

Lenny (00:22:20):
Yeah, same.

Austin Hay (00:22:20):
You're like, that's just permissioning gone wrong. So, I think a big part of the role is designing systems that are automated to handle that stuff because ideally you don't want to be sitting around in your computer all day clicking one conductor request to approve permissions. You should look at the role, look at the experience of tenure and department and make a decision about which accesses you get. So, automating that is a big part of my job. The manual part of my job, which I feel like is actually really fun, is again the designing systems and contracts for the future. So, it's about how do we design a system and create a vision and persuade people about what our system technology can look like over the course of one to two years, the time span that I usually look at. And then how do you change state from then to now? Some of that has to bring in financials and contracts. That's where this plays a role. What are our contract terms today? What's the price we're paying? What is our growth going to be?

(00:23:12):
Can we build a financial model to show how much it's going to cost us both in terms of operational efficiency and actual real fixed and variable costs to end up in that state? And then how do I create a graceful argument to persuade people that we should spend engineering time and resources? And usually it nets out pretty clear. It's like if it's less than a certain amount, how do you justify spending any engineering time on it? You have to wait for the problem to become big enough. But then back to your other point around how do I give growth managers out there something useful. I would say the big thing that people forget in an early stage of a company's lifetime is that the company will outlast you, hopefully. You will not be the last growth manager unless the company fails. So, I tend to take a little bit of a different approach than most, which is like I think you should always be thinking about the future.

(00:24:02):
That doesn't necessarily mean you should make design choices that over index towards the future so much that you miss product market fit or you make poor product decisions. But when you set up tools and you pick tools and you implement them, you should be thinking, what's going to happen a year from now if I don't change anything? And is this going to be a catastrophic situation or not? And then try to take actions to mitigate that risk. Some examples are like if it's $2,000 to get SSO and two days to set it up and that prevents you from having a security problem where somebody downloads all your users, it seems like a great investment.

(00:24:37):
And guess what? Over time, if you don't do that, you're going to eventually have to hire an IT person to go and set up SSF for all your tools. So, some of this is more of just being a good steward about managing first and third party tools with an eye towards the future. It's always a trade-off, right? Because the more time you spend when you're building product early in a company's lifetime, that time could be spent on other things. So, if you waste it managing third party tools or setting up correctly, then maybe you miss out on a key product feature. So, I think it is a tough balance to strike.

Lenny (00:25:06):
Coming back to the different kind of roles within the growth umbrella, if someone has someone leading paid growth let's say, and they're just like a paid growth person, do you also find a MarTech person to work alongside this person? How connected would you be to someone that's just responsible for paid growth?

Austin Hay (00:25:24):
Maybe a key differentiator too. We didn't talk about this in the beginning, but there's marketing technology and marketing operations. So, in my mind, this is just my own kind of mental framework is marketing technology has tech in it. So, it's usually an engineer or somebody with an engineering background doing that function. Marketing operations is usually not always technical. Maybe a systems analyst or business analyst could be somebody really, really smart, but they may not have an engineering background. So, I think that's a key distinction too. And you typically see that in B2B where you'll have mar ops function, which is setting up campaigns, sending email blasts, debugging, doing analytics work, SQL queries, all semi-technical work but not engineering based. So, in my mind when we talk about marketing technology, I'm really thinking it as an engineering based role and even by background, I'm not a software engineer, but I was a civil engineer and I learned how to program and I went through a bunch of coding to get there.

(00:26:21):
So, that's my way into the engineering world. And you typically find that a lot with marketing technologists in particular is they either are software engineers or they've gotten enough experience to moonlight as software engineers. And so we get to this problem set of a user acquisition person. How would they rely on a marketing technologist? Well, I think the most superhuman user acquisition people out there are engineers and they don't need a marketing technologist because they set up the tool themself. They know how the paid campaign runs and they just do it all. And you'll typically find these super humans at small startups where the engineer is just told by the co-founder, hey, go figure out how Facebook ads work. And superhuman is born. More often though that doesn't happen. Or those people once they do it once, they never want to do it again. So, you'll typically find the role split and that's the natural thing that happens.

(00:27:13):
As you scale, you divide responsibility and you'll see you'll have the person who's responsible for bidding and acquiring users and paying down those campaign costs. Then you have the person who's in charge of how does it all work? How do we get this thing to actually run? And that's very similar to what we have at Ramp. We have an amazing user acquisition team. I know Sri Batchu was on here a while back. He hired a guy named Cody Morgan at Ramp who has a user acquisition team. And the way to think of it is, my job is to help support them in running all their campaign needs and when they have a directive from the CEO that says we need to improve CAC or change any of our metrics, it's my job to partner with them to help them do that. And actually one of the coolest and most fun projects that we worked on early when I joined Ramped is we were optimizing.

(00:27:55):
We're trying to get top of funnel data all the way down to the bottom of the funnel and tie it with opportunity data so we could send that back to the ad network so that rather than optimizing your campaign off of when a user clicks a button on the website, you're actually optimizing it off of did the opportunity occur and what was the kind of ideal value for that opportunity? And you're sending that data as a synthetic event back to Facebook and all those guys. So, it can be really cool and super advanced stuff depending how deep on the funnel you get and how complex your business is.

Lenny (00:28:25):
So, you're generally not running campaigns of your own unsafe Facebook or AdWords. You're mostly as a MarTech person supporting people who are doing that.

Austin Hay (00:28:34):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:28:35):
Awesome.

Austin Hay (00:28:35):
Helping them use tools and technologies to do it.

Lenny (00:28:38):
Great. Do people give you goals? Are you responsible for growth goals of your own? And in general, are MarTech people, should they have goals and growth goals on their plate or are they just there to support people who do?

Austin Hay (00:28:52):
Oh, that's a great question and I would like, maybe this is at the end of the podcast, we ask people about this because I would love to know what is a better version of goaling? So, there's two ways that I've thought of it. One is my goals are directly tied to the people I'm serving. So, if user acquisition has, I mean we do, we have a growth goal and we have a CAC goal at Ramp. So, my goals are tied to them, so I'm going to help make sure that that is achieved, but then there's also a cost and efficiency goal that I internally think is valuable. Whether or not the business thinks it is valuable, it doesn't really matter. I come from a sales background and I like to run lean and efficient teams, and so I'm always thinking to myself, how much were the tools when I came in, how much are they now?

(00:29:34):
Have I set us up for success so that as we grow, our cost per user or cost per seat comes down and how much more efficient are we because of that? The ideal world is that you actually are growing as a business making more money, hiring more people, acquiring more users, and your total cost of tooling per person goes down. That's like the dream. And there's lots of ways you can build that financial model, but I mean that's what I think most marketing technology leaders should strive for is to make sure that they're controlling costs over time because most businesses don't. There can be some goals that are discreet in nature that are not cost-efficient, but more like net capability related. So, it's like, hey, we want to design a first party system that's world-class that achieves these three goals, right? Maybe you want to incorporate artificial intelligence into some part of our product platform and incorporate third party tools.

(00:30:25):
And those are more like discrete product goals. In the same way that a business might launch an external product goal to launch a feature, they sometimes also might have internal product goals, clean up our revenue operations systems, make our email marketing system better. In particular, email marketing is one I see come often a lot with small businesses and even medium-sized businesses where they'll have picked a tool at the start of the company's lifecycle and as the company has grown, they've outgrown that tool. They need to move to a Braze or Marketo. And so there'll be a big six-month initiative to say, we just got to switch. That's the goal. We have to safely get off this small tool to a much bigger, more complex tool that's going to cost us more. It's a lot more complex, but we need to do it without losing money. That's usually the job of a MarTech person in some type of change transformation effort.

Lenny (00:31:14):
Perfect segue to where I wanted to go, which is tooling and your recommendations and favorite tools. And so maybe we start with just what do you find as a good starting tool stack for people starting to think about MarTech and basically growth, and then what does it end up being generally?

Austin Hay (00:31:32):
In terms of stack, again, we think about B2B and B2C. B2C I would say the stack was largely solved from 2017 to 2020. We've had like a renaissance of the data architecture, so what I'm going to do is I'm dig through B2C then and now and then we can go B2B then and now.

Lenny (00:31:52):
Great.

Austin Hay (00:31:52):
Okay. So, B2C, if you back up to 2016, 2017, you have segment and the rise of the CDP. Consumer based businesses have to collect a user and tie a bunch of data to them and then track their actions to send it out to performance ad networks and email marketing tools and product analytics tools. And so you would see this very commoditized stack. It would be like CDP in the middle bunch of tools connected. The promise of the CDP was you integrate one SDK, your engineers don't hate you send all the data to the other tools you can create audiences.

(00:32:26):
Great. Lasted for a long time. The thing about it though that I think really changed around 2020 is that the cost of ownership of warehousing became much cheaper. And so 2021, you start getting to the place where it actually makes a lot of sense and is really easy to store all your data in a warehouse model all your data in the warehouse, and to do it without needing a vast data team. I would say Airbnb was probably doing all this well before anybody else was, but they had the main advantage of a lot of money and a lot of resources. So, now come 2020, it's cost-efficient to have a data team with your own warehouse and to manage data centrally in something like Snowflake. So, now this question is like, okay, well we got to get data into the warehouse, but how do we move data around is totally different.

(00:33:11):
And that's what really led to the rise of reverse ETLs. So, now you can actually build your own CDP and lots of businesses already have, I'm consulting with a well known financial trading platform a couple of months back, and they have a CDP, they have all this internal data in their warehouse, but they have not been able to activate it because it's pretty old architecture. Everything's batch based end of the day. What they need is a reverse ETL. They don't need to take that data and just get it out into the world. So, they need the reverse ETL component or the transformation component of a CDP. And so I'd say now today when we think about B2C businesses, you can either go to the traditional route, buy CDP, hook up all your tools, third party.

(00:33:52):
I think that's a great move if you do not have a lot of engineering resources because you're not spending a ton of time and energy on a warehouse and all the modeling that comes with it, you're just spending time to implement one SDK. I think if simplicity is the name of the game for your business, CDP, Centralized Stack, great move. If you are an advanced engineering culture and you are cutting edge and you're going to do a bunch of modeling in DBT and you already have Snowflake, you should move towards a model of using a reverse ETL. What it means is that there's a way to get your data into the warehouse and then how you activate it is completely independent from the CDP. And so what that means is actually you can have lots of different variations of the stack.

(00:34:31):
You could use Amplitude as your CDP, collect all your data, stream it into Snowflake. They actually now have an integration with Snowflake that lets you feed data directly out of Snowflake, and then you could use a reverse ETL to just pipe that data wherever you want. There's a really good section though, again, sorry to self aggrandize, but there's a really good section in the Reforge module this fall that talks about what happens when you have multiple ways to move data. You buy amplitude for your CDP and you're moving data to your warehouse. Amplitude is a bunch of integrations, but you also have reverse ETL and you can move data out of your warehouse.

(00:35:05):
Where do you choose? And I would say a lot of businesses get in trouble when they don't have a methodology or a system for how and when to move data from one place to the other, so they just do it haphazardly, right? And the key in systems management is you want to design a process for doing it some type of waterfall or mental model for when it makes sense to move data directly from Amplitude, which is the ingestion point of your data stream or from the warehouse where you can model it and make it better. I think the key is just having a philosophy and approach. There's not really one answer, but that's all B2C. So, B2B I would say ... Yeah, go ahead.

Lenny (00:35:40):
Before we move on to that one, you mentioned reverse ETLs. What are some examples of products that are reverse ETLs so that people can look them up?

Austin Hay (00:35:47):
Yeah, I personally think the reverse ETL is a capability. It's the ability to move data from a warehouse to a tool. So, technically speaking, you'll find reverse ETLs in CDPs and as standalone products. Segment has a reverse ETL function they just launched, and Particle has a reverse ETL function they just launched. Rudder Stack, which is a CDP has always had a reverse ETL function where you can take warehouse data and move it to different cloud infrastructure. Then there are distinct standalone products. Census, which was back Bay 16Z and Hightouch are the two standalone reverse ETLs. And like I said, I'm an investor in Hightouch, love their work, we use them at Ramp. At the end of the day, you should pick tools because they help solve problems, not because of anything else. So, we can come back to that if you want.

Lenny (00:36:32):
Wonderful. Great, great. Yeah, that was perfect. Keep going.

Austin Hay (00:36:35):
Okay. Yeah, so we talked about B2B, or sorry, B2C. B2B, I probably don't have as much history as say people who survived the dot-com crash in 2008. I started really my career in B2B in 2014, so I'll share a little bit of my experience and I'm just hopefully just saying this because listeners may chime in and be like, oh man, this guy doesn't know what the hell he's talking about, which is totally fair game. So, 2014 though, I remember working at Branch, I was working for our COO Mike Molinet, who's now at this really cool company called Thena, but at the time I was working for Mike, and as we talked about before, oftentimes growth stacks just appear because you're given a challenge. And I remember sitting in this tiny room with Mike. We were over in Palo Alto, right off the fills in Palo Alto in this tiny room.

(00:37:27):
It was boiling in the room like so hot we were sweating and we were mapping out on a whiteboard how we would design our first version of our system, like how we capture leads, how we get them into Salesforce, how we would email them with a little tool called Outreach at the time, that was still a startup. And I'll send it to you after this if you want to show them to viewers, but it's so MVP, but it still models what a lot of people have today. There's some ingestion point for your data. There's Salesforce, there's some type of outbounding tool, there's an enrichment tool, and then a lot of other Jerry rig stuff hooked up to Salesforce. And for the most part, that's how B2B still exists today as you have Salesforce and then the whole world and the universe revolves around Salesforce. You just have more advanced tools, you have Gom and stuff like that.

(00:38:12):
I think the big change though, and what is really fascinating and has been fun to watch is in the last two, three years, you now have this whole rise of B2B2C, which takes all the complexity of the top of funnel user acquisition system and stuffs it right alongside your CRM and how you build an elegant system there in that space, I think is one of the most complicated and intricate pieces of being a MarTech person today. And some of it just has to do with the data language. Like all these B2C tools were designed with two objects, a user and an event. And so if you're not a technologist, it's like object orientation is how you kind of think about the world. There's only two concepts for the world in a user acquisition based system. A user who's a person either anonymous or known coming into your website and the things that they do on your website or application, and you use all that data to acquire them or model them.

(00:39:03):
In a B2B business you have all that complexity, but at the end of the day, you might not really need it if all the person is doing is it's just the company is signing the contract and then you don't really care what happens afterwards. You might track users and events inside your application, but it's not for the acquisition, it's for the retention of the user. B2B2C is fascinating because you have all the complexity at the top, but then how and when do you tie a user to a company or some type of entity object, and what tools do you need to do that and where do they live in the system? And do those tools actually have competing priorities? Let me give you the greatest example of this that happened at Notion when I was consulting to them at Chris when I was consulting to them and at Ramp is having both HubSpot and Salesforce.

(00:39:45):
Both are CRMs, both have the ability to track users and companies, neither are CDPs. And how you actually map the data from HubSpot to Salesforce kind of determines how much hell you're in, and there's really no good solution. It's just like you have to figure out for yourself, how do you want to acquire use at the top of the funnel? How do you merge them into the bottom of the funnel of the Salesforce? And again, there are lots of options or versions of the world. You could use Amplitude only and collect all your user and event data and then merge that into Salesforce directly. You could collect all your data in Amplitude or Segment and then post that to HubSpot, which then posts that to Salesforce. But of course, as you make these decisions, your systems becomes more complicated and more than one person can manage. So, there's this trade-off between complexity and resources that you always have to juggle.

Lenny (00:40:33):
Today's episode is brought to you by Brave Search and their newest product, the Brave Search API, an independent global search index you can use to power your search or AI apps. If your work involves AI, then you know how important new data is to train your LLMs and to power your AI applications. You might be building an incredible AI product, but if you're using the same data sets as your competitors to train your models, you don't have much of an advantage. Brave Search is the fastest growing search engine since Bing, and it's 100% independent from the big tech companies. Its index features billions of pages of high quality data from real humans, and it's constantly updated thanks to being the default search engine in the Brave browser. If you're building products with search capabilities, you're probably experiencing soaring API costs or lack of viable global alternatives to Bing or Google.

(00:41:23):
It's only going to become harder to afford these challenges. The Brave Search API gives you access to its novel web scale data with competitive features, intuitive structuring and affordable costs. AI devs will particularly benefit from data containing thorough coverage of recent events. Lenny's Podcast listeners can get started testing the API for free at brave.com/lenny. That's brave.com/lenny. There's this big question within B2B and B2C around how to do attribution. Well, it's a never ending struggle. I'm curious if you have any pro-tips or best practices or tools that you use to improve the way attribution happens at a company.

Austin Hay (00:42:09):
Actually, I listened to your pod on multi-touch attribution. I'm forgetting who you were with at this point, but it was like I was loving it because it talked about MMM and MTA specifically.

Lenny (00:42:19):
Yeah, that was a newsletter post actually, not even a podcast.

Austin Hay (00:42:22):
Yes. So, back to our conversation around division of responsibility. I'm not always the person you should talk to create an MMM model. I'm not a data scientist. I know how to make MMM models and I know what they are.

Lenny (00:42:36):
Can you explain MMM briefly?

Austin Hay (00:42:38):
Mixed Media Modeling. And MTA stands for Multi-touch Attribution and it's these two ways of measuring the world and marketing to understand how you should allocate resources to campaign spend. MTA and MMM though are both underpinned by how you collect data. They're both informed by the user object and the event objects that you collect on your website or your application that then lead to the data that data scientists use for MTA and MMM. That's the connection between data and MarTech is often the tools and systems that we build and stand up and manage are what are used for these very complicated growth, experimentation and attribution results at the end of it. And one of the most discreet things you can do for MTA, because I get this question all the time around, hey, do we need MTA?

(00:43:21):
What should I do first touch or last touch? Should I do both? And there's actually really, I can send you this guide, but there's six or seven things you can do to basically futureproof yourself from needing either one. Because most businesses either start with first touch or last touch and then eventually want to move to a multi-touch attribution model. And for those who don't know what that is, first touch is where you kind of collect the data about where somebody first came from. Last touch is where you collect the data about where the person last came from. So, an example, would this be like if I went to Lenny's Newsletter from a Google ad and that's all he has? That would be my first touch and my last touch. If I first came from a Google ad to Lenny's Podcast, but then later I came from a Facebook ad or I don't know direct, then that would be my last touch.

(00:44:06):
And so it's this question of does the Google original first Google Channel get credit or does the second one the Facebook or direct get credit? And the first touch attribution model, a hundred percent goes to the first channel and the last touch attribution model, a hundred percent credit goes to the last touch. And a mixed attribution model or multi-touch attribution model, you're trying to figure out how to split the difference. And usually the evolution for businesses is they start with first touch or last touch, then they go to splitting it literally 50/50. And then somebody gets angry because they're not getting enough credit and they say, we've got to go to MTA. And there are both first party solutions for that and third party solutions for MTA. But back to the main thing, the main point is if you think about what you're collecting, this is for website businesses, you're collecting the referrer, like in the URL where the person's coming from, and you need any UTMs associated with that person.

(00:44:58):
And you also need any parameters from the advertising networks that might give them the ability to counter a conversion. Every ad network out there has little things they stuff into your URL that tell you that you came from them. Facebook has FVP, FPID, they sometimes encode it. Google has this thing called Google Click ID, which is just a really long string of characters that don't matter unless you know how to decode it. But all advertisers, and for the longest time advertising worked by putting parameters in URLs, pushing somebody through to your website, collecting those parameters and then passing it back to the ad network so they could get credit for it. And so in my mind, the best practice that everybody should stand up from day one is to basically design the system for MTA and then use whatever makes sense as you grow.

(00:45:45):
And so the way that I typically recommend to people is like imagine when a user comes to your website, you collect the URL, collect the referring URL, collect all the additional marketing parameters that you might want, [inaudible 00:45:57], TikTok ID, Microsoft ID, you should just make a list of them. And if you don't have that list, I can give them to you. And then you should collect all UTMs. So, in the URL, you're going to have UTM campaign, UTM medium. Most marketers use this to note what the campaign type was. Now the thing is that UTM is only going to be specific to the moment in time that the person came to your website. So, back to example about Lenny's podcast. If I come to LE's podcast and I came from a Google ad, then my UTM is only for that Google ad.

(00:46:28):
So, I have a Google Click ID and I have a UTM. So, what you're got to do is you've got to store those parameters locally on the device. Either was a browser or whatever. You got to store it as UTM first campaign, UTM last campaign. And what you do is every single time that a person comes, you replace the last campaign or the last value with the one that's there. So, say the last one was Facebook and then I come later from a direct mailer ad you replace the UTM last medium with the new one. Now what's happening if you're using third party tools is that you're collecting this user information when the person's on the website, you're going to collect it both as a user attribute and as an event that way. What's going to happen on the backend for your data warehouse team is they're going to see a user profile that has both the first attribution information and the last attribution information.

(00:47:20):
And then for all the stuff in the middle, you're firing off a page view event with first and last, where the last might deviate if there were multiple steps in the middle. So, what they can do is they can just coalesce over all the last UTMs they've seen on all your events by user to get both their first one, all the ones in the middle and the last. And so this isn't actually that complicated to set up. Most people just don't do the work early on. And then when they want to go back later and have MTA results, they don't have the data to do it. So, one of the things I tell people who are debating this is let's just get the infrastructure right from the beginning.

(00:47:55):
Let's set up so that you have users, you have user attributes, you're collecting first and last UTM on users. You're firing events with all those. There's some other more complex things you can do too. You can set them in first party cookies and you can also set them in your third party cookies for your tooling vendors. At the end of the day though, what matters is you just are collecting this information from the beginning. That way when you actually want to progress your attribution model, you don't have to wait a really long time to start gathering that data.

Lenny (00:48:24):
Amazing. I love the details that you're sharing. I don't know where else people can find this sort of advice. It sounds like a core part of this is one, just having a data warehouse where you just throw all this data into, and two, having a taxonomy that you can rely on and do multiple things with down the road. Is that roughly right?

Austin Hay (00:48:42):
Yeah, I think that's right. The taxonomy though, I think what's interesting is it's very much guided by your third party tools. And again, that's the reason why I think companies often miss the mark here is because they're not thinking about what can my tool actually allow me to put into it in the first place.

Lenny (00:48:59):
Just to make sure I understand what you're saying there, you're saying generally maybe third party tools limit what you can do, which set you up for hardship later. And maybe what you're saying is do that yourself, that tracking piece, is that roughly what you're saying?

Austin Hay (00:49:14):
Yeah, I think that's right. The way to think of it is if you build your own data warehouse, your schema is unlimited. You can do whatever you want. You can design product schema, you can design user schema and event schema, but most third party B2C tools don't allow you to control the schema. There's only one CDP I know that does that, that's Snowplow. The rest are there's a user object and an event object. So, you can either stuff data as a user property onto the user object or you can stuff data into the event and fire it off as an event, but that's what you're working with. So, what I'm saying is most people just don't think about the object orientation of the third party tools they think about and they don't design their website traffic or their app traffic. We didn't talk about app, which is a whole different slew because doing attribution with Iowas 14 is much more difficult.

(00:50:07):
But even in the website version of the world, people will often just collect UTMs and think that their job is done and it's like actually it's more complex. You have to think about first and last, think about the steps in the middle, design it so that you're putting it on the user profile and in the event. And so this goes back to the main thing that we were talking about earlier, whereas the job of a marketing technologist is to think often one to two years down the road about what we're going to need to solve for and design systems in an elegant way, not to break the bank, but to at least be the minimum viable product to actually get there. And a lot of my job, and I think the job of marketing technologists is trying to preserve that future state in the most minimally invasive engineering and resource way possible.

Lenny (00:50:48):
You've talked a bit about thinking ahead and a bunch of tools and platforms, and I'm wondering are there any new and emerging tools, platforms or even growth channels that you're keeping an eye on or excited about or finding more and more useful?

Austin Hay (00:51:02):
I'd be remiss if we didn't talk about Threads, right? Threads is super interesting. The question will be how quickly can they stand up an API for advertising and what does that look like or do they just blind it in with the existing meta and Facebook architecture? One of the caveats that I'm sure a lot of performance marketers out there will agree with is Facebook has a conflict of interest in reporting, right? They want you to spend money, so obviously they want to report the best results. And that's the reason why attribution parties like Branch and AppsFlyer exist is to somewhat curtail that conflict of interest. And so I'll be really interested just to see how attribution works, especially when you're moving from Instagram to Threads, from Facebook to Threads. Will it be the same architecture, will be the same advertising platform? Will they try to do something new?

(00:51:52):
So, I'm keeping my eyes on that. Reddit is also a very interesting place to convert now. They're opening up their conversions API, and I'm seeing a lot more investment in Reddit just because you can have embedded ads now that almost look like they can be posts that you can comment on. I think it just speaks to the maturity of the advertising business. What's happening in the background of all this is ad attribution from apps has become a lot more difficult and mostly aggregate. From 2010 to 2020, we had the golden years of deterministic matching where it was very easy to run an ad and understand with precision who installed the app. Maybe you didn't know their name, but you actually would know their IDFA and you could tie that to their PI. You can't do that anymore. It's very challenging.

(00:52:35):
Even when you can do it, the results that you would get are pretty low because nobody's going to be opting into giving you their IDFA. So, what that means is these ad networks are becoming more complex, sophisticated, and interesting right at the same time that it's harder for marketers to really understand how they're spending money. And so I'm paying a lot of attention to how marketers make decisions with probabilistic data because most of the work that I'm doing now is actually saying, well, given that we don't have determinist data about a certain audience or where somebody came from, how can I find other information that will create a model for 30% of the population and we can use that to extrapolate to a hundred. So, probabilistic matching and probabilistic attribution I feel like is a skillset that more marketing technologists and marketers should just get familiar with the way that we make decisions today.

Lenny (00:53:27):
Wow, I hadn't heard of this concept before. And that's how people are starting, or at least you're suggesting that's how people should start thinking about growth results and impact is less, here's how much this ad drove, the likelihood that this ad did this had this sort of impact.

Austin Hay (00:53:46):
And it's not the case with all channels, but it's specific for apps that have mobile apps, they're going to be impacted by it because they just aren't going to be able to discreetly identify one-to-one the person that came from a campaign. They'll know that a group of people came from a campaign, but they won't be able to make measurement with those people alongside other attributes. For website, it's not the same, but there are lots of things that are making it more challenging. One is browsers now are stripping out those URLs we talked about. So, you're just seeing a bigger and bigger percentage of people being counted as organic that actually came from a paid advertisement because when they got redirected to your website, the browser truncated all those URL parameters. The second thing is cookie blockers. We talk about all these third parties before.

(00:54:30):
The way that third parties often collect information is they drop a cookie in your browser that tracks you, if you've heard of Segment, which is one of the most well-known CDPs of the last few years, is they implant a little third party cookie on the site that contains an anonymous user ID and all of your attributes as you're navigating the site. And then once you log in, they convert that to a known or non-anonymous user ID.

(00:54:53):
Usually that's tied to some type of entity ID or a user record. And at that moment in time, if you come back and they see your cookie, they kind of know who you are. Now, if you're blocking cookies, that means you're basically remaining anonymous throughout the entire user journey until you log in. Not to mention a lot of people have lead funnels where you need that information to actually understand what the user is doing before they convert. So, if you're blocking third party cookies before they even get a chance to convert, you have no information about where the person came from. You just saw that they signed up, and so it might as well be organic.

Lenny (00:55:26):
So, you talked about how many people are trying to get used to this new world of ATT and much harder to measure attribution and all that. Is there anything you've learned that has worked well to help you recover from that a little bit in terms of measuring what's happening? Is there any tips you can share or anything you've seen work?

Austin Hay (00:55:44):
Yeah, I mean I think a lot of people are just gravitating towards MMM now without really understanding when MMM is useful or not. I don't know if there's a company called Recast. I think you're an investor. Am I crazy?

Lenny (00:55:57):
I am. And that's who wrote that article that you mentioned actually.

Austin Hay (00:56:01):
That's right. It's Michael and it was somebody else, I can't remember the name besides-

Lenny (00:56:04):
It was another Mike Taylor.

Austin Hay (00:56:06):
I'm not an expert on MMM, so I'm not going to be able to comment to quite the degree that they have. But when I spoke with Michael, and when I think about MMM, a lot of my conversation is this actually really realistic for our business right now? Do we have the data to run an MMM model and how is it going to change or chart the course of our performance ad marketing business in light of having this information? And when I think about it through those lens, most of the time businesses are not ready for MMM. They actually just be an MTA and they need better probabilistic modeling. And I know that's not a super spicy take, but I'd just say at least at Ramp and what I'm seeing at other businesses right now that are operating, it's much more of like we're going back to the days where we understand in broad strokes how much each of our campaigns is driving in advertising revenue.

(00:57:00):
We're not able to tie that discreetly with the user journey. And we know that some percentage of this user base might have been lost or organic. So, in light of those, how do we make spend? And then also you can be pretty smart. You can do, for example, geo-based testing on billboards. Try to isolate that as a factor if you withhold all other confounding factors so you can be smart. Coordinating these types of campaigns though is really challenging, especially if you're a really big business, let's say runs online advertising throughout the US and you're trying to do targeted billboard tests in an isolated number of cities across the states coordinating to turn off demographics, make sure there's not isolating factors. It can be really challenging. So, there's not a silver bullet right now I don't think.

Lenny (00:57:42):
Awesome. Just a few more questions and then a broader question I want to ask. So, say you want to start hiring the next Austin, first of all, what do you look for in the person? What are signs that they're probably going to be worth chatting with? And then what are some interview questions you'd like to ask to get a sense of how strong they are?

Austin Hay (00:58:02):
So, the first thing that I always gravitate towards is just intellectual curiosity. And I know that's very, maybe a little bit overrated, but I think you can tell pretty quickly if somebody's just interested in the world and learning things. And the thing about third party tools is you are constantly learning. You'll never be an expert in everything because there's way too many tools to be an expert on, I forgot what publication, I think it's MarTech editor in chief or something. There's a publication that I subscribed to and everything is classified as MarTech and the diagram is huge, like cover a wall. Now I don't believe everything like that is MarTech, but even if a fraction is, there are way too many tools in technology to ever be an expert. So, you have to be both very interested in learning and very willing to quickly learn if you want to be in the space.

(00:58:50):
And so I generally look for intellectual curiosity as the first sign. The second thing that I think helps people a lot who have intellectual curiosity is they're scrappy in engineering. They might not be the best engineer possible, but they know how to get around. They know JavaScript, they know Python, they can read API documentation and make an API request. They have enough base knowledge to basically understand how to solve a problem that an engineer might do even if they themselves are not an engineer. Now obviously you can get lucky sometimes and you'll find the engineer who never wants to be an engineer again and decides to move into something less technical. And in those cases they're super powerful, but I haven't met a lot of those people in my life. And also there's just some business dynamics to it. You could probably make more as a backend engineer than as a MarTech guy.

(00:59:41):
So, you probably just pursue the pathway that makes more money. It's like a little bit of a utility function. So, I look for intellectual curiosity. I look for basic engineering scrappiness. And as a side note, I would say lots of people out there, the advice that I give them is you don't have to go get a software engineering degree. You can teach yourself, I am self-taught. You can take a coding academy online. I think you get enough knowledge through being able to do web programming or some type of backend programming. So, I would say it's not more than a six-month investment for anybody to really get the skillset that's needed. Obviously once you get the skillset, you can build upon it with years of experience afterwards. But if you're new to the space and you're in marketing ops and you want to get more technical, or if you're a user acquisition manager who did paid performance, but you're like, I really want do things end to end.

(01:00:33):
You can just go pick up some software skills and you probably are going to be pretty dangerous from that. And so those are the two things I gravitate towards. There's obviously many more, but those are the first two. The questions that I like to ask is what does I like to ask people how they prepared for the interview. This is not, I can't take credit for this. My wife told me about, gave me this idea and I loved it. I think it was a16z partner. But I love the question because when you ask, hey, how did you prepare? You're really asking how does the person think? How did they plan? How did they take things seriously or not? What did they read? What did they do? And if you have to prompt them to tell you all the things they did, then they're just not a systems thinker.

(01:01:17):
But if they're like, hey, actually I read these things, I did this. I woke up, I went for a run. The more interesting complex the answer, the more interesting complex the candidate. And so I love the question because it just gives you a really good understanding of the person on a whole, like right out the gate. And then the other question I like to ask is I like to ask, so you're coming in tomorrow to our marketing tech system and by Friday you have to write up a report on all the things we should change. What do you do? And I like to ask that question because it pretty much signals out people who are biased versus not. People who have tooling biases will immediately just like, we should implement this tool because I used it before and I really like to hire people who are not tool specific, who are more tool agnostic and they think about tools as being things to solve problems as opposed to tools being things that you just solve because you've already solved it one way.

(01:02:12):
This isn't a gripe and it's certainly not intended to slice at PMs, but one of my observations of a lot of PMs is they just pick the tools they've already used before because it's easy and it's a shortcut for them, which I understand, but problems are not always the same. So, tools shouldn't always be the same. So, I like to pick people who think about the problem set and the solution space more and they ask questions about what problems you're trying to solve, which I think is much more of an actual PM mindset of trying to work backward from the problem as opposed to just taking the problem and regurgitating stuff that you already know.

Lenny (01:02:45):
Are there any flags you look for that tell you maybe this person isn't someone you want to be working with?

Austin Hay (01:02:51):
I answer that question on two spectrums. One is if I'm hiring as somebody who's hiring an IC versus I'm getting hired. So, one of the red flags whenever I'm approaching a company to work for them is I'll ask for their company financials and a company that's not willing to divulge their financials to a director level or above person, I don't want to do business with because that means they're hiding something. Or they have a culture where they don't trust the most senior leaders of the organization. Either is a bad choice in my perspective. So, that's one of the questions I always ask when I'm going up for a job, when I'm hiring somebody. Red flags, I feel like one of the false flags not a red flag is more like when there's a gap in somebody's job resume, everybody gravitates towards that and it's often really explainable.

(01:03:39):
A good example is I was hiring somebody once who had a two-year gap in their resume. We didn't end up hiring the person, but they went through all the stages and we didn't hire them, not because of them, but because the job got removed and this person took two years to get a philosophy degree or maybe it was a poetry degree and then also taught himself to program. So, it was a really enriching two years and there were lots of ways that I could see them bringing their past experience and the way that they took time off together to be a really well-rounded candidate.

(01:04:12):
So, I would say I look less for red flags and more for false identifiers on the resume application that may shortcut me towards the decision. Another one is just school people just look at your school where you went to undergrad or grad and they kind of make a decision one way or the other. And I feel like that's also can be a really bad shortcut because there's some amazing founders, for example, who went to school as you maybe had never heard of. Yeah, I know that's not a good way to answer the question, but I don't have a good way of looking for red flags, but I do tend to spend a lot of time on netting out of false flags.

Lenny (01:04:49):
That was a great way to answer the question. I want to move on to something totally different, and this isn't something I've been asking people, but I'm curious if there's something here then maybe if there is, I'll start asking this more regularly. I'm curious if there's just any frameworks that you've found especially useful in your work or even life. Does anything come to mind?

Austin Hay (01:05:07):
One thing that I want to build, so if I ever build this, maybe it'll be a newsletter for you, is just a one-page doc of the most useful life frameworks and they're just the words, and so you obviously have to know them, but I feel like I come across really good frameworks all the time and then I forget them. So, I just want a one pager of Lenny's Life frameworks.

Lenny (01:05:07):
Okay, we're starting this right now.

Austin Hay (01:05:30):
Okay, great.

Lenny (01:05:31):
We'll have number one.

Austin Hay (01:05:31):
All right.

Lenny (01:05:31):
I like this.

Austin Hay (01:05:34):
Okay, so I've already said this and you've promised to put this at the top of the list, so I'm really excited. It's just tools are meant to solve problems and I tell that to every person I hire. I repeat it consistently at Ramp and all of my consulting gigs. And it's not just the words, it's the spirit of it. Tools are really just meant to solve problems. You don't have to buy a tool to solve the problem. You also don't have to buy a specific tool to solve the problem. And I think it embodies so much of what marketing technology is trying to do. It's trying to help people understand their problems and then actually take action on them using tools and technology that are most first party and third party. And most people just focus on the tool part and focus on the buying and integration part.

(01:06:16):
And so I think if you consistently remind yourself that tools are just meant to solve problems, then you really get into a space where you as a systems' person can be an advocate for your marketer or your product people. I think sometimes there is a little bit of a tendency for people to think that people who manage and set up tools are just interested in managing and setting up tools, but really at the end of the day, we're trying to help people actually do stuff. Then there's this PPS framework that I talk about a lot, which is problem, people and system. So, whenever there's a challenge that comes up like at Ramp or in a consulting gig, I like to first say what's the problem? Who are the people involved and what system does it impact? Usually because people just jump straight to the system. They're like, hey, there's this problem, I just need to solve it with the tool. Hey, I'm trying to do X, Y, and Z. Can you just give me admin permission straight to the system?

(01:07:07):
So, if you back up though first you understand the problem like, hey, what is this person trying to solve? What is their discreet issue? A great example is I'm a sales manager and I want to make it so that every time I hire somebody, I don't have to go through this really tough process of onboarding my staff. All right, so that's the problem. Who are the people that involves, does the sales manager need permission from the CRO? Do the sellers need to be trained? Is there some other confounding factor that we're not aware of why we don't want to just automate this thing? Once you have an understanding of the people and the problems that you're trying to solve, then it's really, really easy to design the system to solve that. And so that's my number one framework for technologists in particular is like don't just jump to the system, think backwards, start with the people and the problem and then move to the system solution.

(01:07:52):
And then another one that I've already mentioned too is it's B and B as opposed to BVB. So, build and buy as opposed to build versus buy. People all the time just think the second that you're talking about implementing a tool or procuring a solution, it's, Hey, I want to build this thing or I want to buy this really expensive thing. Build versus buy is a very narrowly constricting decision tree. If it's only build versus buy, then you've already made the decision that you can only do one or the other, which means you're already fighting somebody at your organization. Build and buy means that both of you can win and you can actually create a solution that is not only unique but saves the company time and resources and makes everybody happy. It's more of a consensus driven approach. Whenever I hear in a meeting or a call or some discussion about how we have a tool and it's really expensive and we want to build in herself, I try to just use the build and buy framework to tee people up and say, what about the problem?

(01:08:59):
Can we buy? What about the problem can we build? And where does it make sense to invest our resources and our people accordingly to get the optimal outcome? A great example is a company that I was consulting for was thinking about building their own AB testing tool. And actually we had the same problem at Ramp recently, and they're like, well, we just think we should build ourself. This is core to our technology. We have the engineering resources to do it. And they were evaluating it to build the entire system themselves or buy a third party, I think it was split.io or something like that. And the entire engagement was basically designing a financial model to show them that they could make a lot more money, save money, move faster if they just bought the third party tool at the lowest possible cost and spent all of their resources that they were going to spend building it, building around it and making it their own. And there's lots of, I hate the word synergy, it's just so yucky.

Lenny (01:09:54):
I don't mind it. I think it communicates what you want to communicate, and I feel like people don't say it as often anymore, so maybe it's okay.

Austin Hay (01:10:00):
Yeah, because they're afraid. There are mutual benefits is a better way of saying it, if you build a tool custom to yourself when you've bought a tool because the vendor at that point is committed to you and they want you to be successful, so you often can get accelerated outcomes if you build on top of a third party than if you just build it yourself. A great example is say you buy one of these AB testing tools and you build around it and you're a large customer of them, but you've invested a lot of your own engineering resources to make this solution your own.

(01:10:31):
If they know that and they care about you, they're going to be willing to actually make you happy in the moments where you need a change from them, say some SDK change or a new feature or something like that. A framework that I talk a lot about in my Reforge course is about building a stack. Everybody asks, hey, how do I build my stack? What should I do? What tool should I use? Even you earlier were like, what's the golden stack? Tell me what five tools should I get?

Lenny (01:10:57):
Just tell me.

Austin Hay (01:10:58):
Yeah, yeah. I'll tell you at the very end, I got to hold out. Otherwise, you'll ditch this podcast.

Lenny (01:11:04):
That's right. Yeah. Wait until the end. Is there anything else you want to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Austin Hay (01:11:14):
The only thing I had wanted to fit in, which I feel like is maybe a framework or maybe just a really good decision-making philosophy is this concept of thinking gray. Have you heard of it before?

Lenny (01:11:26):
No. Go on.

Austin Hay (01:11:27):
Okay. So, Steven B. Sample is a professor at USC. He wrote a book called The Contrarian's Guide to Leadership, really great book. It's one of his principles. There's actually a lot of great principles in the book, but this is the one that I think has stuck with me the most in my career. And the concept of thinking gray is so often in life and in our jobs, we are forced to make decisions very quickly. We have to think black or white about a problem set or a solution, and then decide. One of his tactics is this concept of thinking gray, which is actually to not decide for as long as you possibly can before you have to decide. It's really challenging because it involves this little thing called patience, which I do not have a lot of, most of the time, and I know most people don't as well. But it's particularly really relevant in systems thinking and product because so often we believe that we have to make a decision because our boss is telling us because there's an OPR, because we feel the pain because somebody's complaining to me.

(01:12:30):
But actually in reality, you don't have to make a decision at all. You can just let it sit for a while. And this also applies to, I think, how you move through the world and view people. A lot of times we will meet somebody in a company setting or in a business setting, and we are quick to make decisions about them. We even asked me questions about how I hire people very quickly. We're looking for shortcuts to make decisions about evaluating people. One of the best pieces of advice though about thinking gray is it gives you the grace to not decide about people until you have to decide. So, obviously for an interview decision, you have to decide.

(01:13:05):
You have to decide yes or no. But so often you'll come across people and you'll meet them once or twice. And I feel like there's this tendency in the back of everybody's brain to be like, do I like this person? Do I want to work with them? And the question often is not that it's do you have to even make a decision right now? And by leaving yourself to have space to decide, you actually open up the possibility that in the future you'll make a better decision. So, I think that's a really good lesson for systems, and it's obviously a lesson that you can apply to the rest of your life too.

Lenny (01:13:37):
Austin, that was awesome. And with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Austin Hay (01:13:43):
I'm so ready, Lenny.

Lenny (01:13:45):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Austin Hay (01:13:49):
So, first book I already mentioned, but say it again. It's The Contrarians Guide to Leadership awesome book. Second book that would be really good is the Art and Adventure of Leadership by a guy name Warren Bennis. And these are more philosophically leadership books. They're less about technical specs on how to run a business. So, you have to be into that.

Lenny (01:14:10):
Favorite recent movie or TV show.

Austin Hay (01:14:12):
I'm currently watching for the first time Suits, which I'd never seen before, which I think is pretty good because the story arc of every Suits episode is that there's a problem. Then they solve the problem and then the problem is solved at the end. So, it's very gratifying for anybody out there who's a high anxiety person who just wants to have this story arc resolved at the end of the episode. But if that's not your jam and you like excitement, also watching Silo, Witcher. For comic relief, there's Our Flag Means Death, which is hilarious. Have you seen that show?

Lenny (01:14:44):
No, not Our Flag Means Death.

Austin Hay (01:14:46):
Now you need to go watch it. It's about black beard and gay pirate captain. So, strongly recommend that. And then for just really dumb comedy, What We Do in the Shadows is hilarious.

Lenny (01:14:59):
What was that? What We Do in the Shadows?

Austin Hay (01:15:01):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:15:02):
Okay. Wow, a lot of recommendations. Thank you for that. What is a favorite interview question you like to ask candidates?

Austin Hay (01:15:09):
So, I talked about what you did to prepare, but the other one that I think is really good because it forces people to get vulnerable is tell me about the most difficult or challenging thing you've overcome in the last year in your life. It doesn't have to be work related, it could be personal. And I think it's a great way to just reset the atmosphere, make people dig a little bit deeper into who they are and be more vulnerable. And I find usually it also helps calm them down because if they shared them one of the most challenging, difficult, and hard parts of their life, then all the other questions just are pretty easy. So, that's one of my favorites.

Lenny (01:15:43):
What is a favorite product that you've recently discovered that you really like?

Austin Hay (01:15:46):
This sounds super dumb. It's called cal.com, and I'll tell you the story first. I've been a big Calendly user for a long time, but Calendly is pretty expensive. If Calendly is listening, you want to give me promo, cool. But it's very expensive. And then I also just found that it is not always graceful at syncing multiple calendars from both businesses and consulting gigs and personal, and I had trouble remembering my Calendly link. I don't know. The interface is like circa 2016. So, really looking for something a little bit more notion like with a Command K interface and just integrations that work. And cal.com has not failed me. It has been awesome. So, if people are looking for new Calendly tools, strongly recommend.

Lenny (01:16:30):
Wow, I never heard of this. What a great domain, cal.com.

Austin Hay (01:16:32):
I know, right. Killer.

Lenny (01:16:34):
What is a favorite life motto that you often repeat to yourself or share with other people, either in work or in life?

Austin Hay (01:16:42):
I just think a lot about the power of appreciation, and one thing that I've just been thinking a lot about recently is the challenge that people might be facing in their daily lives. I actually was recently listening to another podcast by Adam Fishman, and he had Brian Balfour on. And Adam's basically just interviewing a bunch of dads, which is cool. But the nice thing about being a little bit older in your life being a dad is that you maybe have seen hardship before. And this podcast is great at just exploring the stories of people who I really admire and go through their hardship. And in that it's been a very profound experience, understanding the type of challenges that people have gone through in their lives, people who have lost mothers and fathers early in life, people who have lost children. I myself, my wife and I lost her dad last year.

(01:17:35):
We lost two grandparents to COVID, we lost our dog. So, I think that the way that it ties to appreciation is if you can understand what people are going through and you start to view them a little bit more as a human and understand what's beneath the surface of work, who are they? What do they care about? What are the things that are driving their life forward? It just makes you so much more appreciative for what you have and the good moments when they're actually there. And this doesn't just apply to life. It's also like business too. It makes winning a lot more fun when you know the hell that people have gone through. That's just something I like to talk a lot about with people, especially folks who are younger in their careers who maybe have only seen wins describing what the losses look like so they can picture in their mind and then have some experience when they go through it. It's a big part of my shtick.

Lenny (01:18:23):
What an excellent answer. I am definitely going to keep asking this question. For people who are still listening here is the promised Golden Stack.

Austin Hay (01:18:32):
Okay, so Golden Stack. If I was a B2C business, I'd buy Amplitude for my CDP, I'd buy customer IO and maybe I'd upgrade to Braze in the future. I put everything in Snowflake, I'd buy high touch to reverse ETL, all that data out to my ad networks. For attribution, probably AppsFlyer from a mobile app, if not Branch, but it'd probably be AppsFlyer first. So, that gets you, you got AppsFlyer, Amplitude as your CDP and product analytics, Customer IO for email. Snowflake for your data warehouse, Hightouch for streaming all the data tools. That's like golden stack today if I were implementing it for a B2C business. For B2B, roughly the same, Amplitude. If you need an attribution tool, if it's B2B, actually, if it's a web only business, probably we use Branch because Branch is better for web.

(01:19:23):
So, you have Branch, Amplitude, connect all the data to Salesforce. Hopefully at some point in time somebody builds a better Salesforce. That'll be for our next podcast though, Lenny, can't cover that today. And then reverse ETL is Hightouch. So, very similar except the only difference is what do you do for an email tool? A lot of people use HubSpot. I would try to go away with Customer IO as long as I could and then I'd move to Braze afterwards. So, a big difference is just Braze versus Customer IO for B2B.

Lenny (01:19:49):
Final question for you. I heard that you're a drone pilot and I'm curious, what is the coolest place you've flown your drone or the coolest thing that's happened with your drone?

Austin Hay (01:19:57):
So, this actually gets back to our intellectual curiosity thing. Maybe I just search for weird people when I hire because I just love when people do interesting things that are unrelated to work. And the story is during COVID, I didn't really want to just better myself online through a bunch of educational platforms. I just felt like it would be a little bit soul crushing to sit in front of my computer screen and learn how to do statistics or whatever. So, I was trying to look for things that were interesting, niche, outside of my domain knew nothing about. And the three that I came up with were, I learned to fly a drone. I became a CFP, certified financial planner and I became a notary. And it's just because they seemed really useful things that had nothing to do with my work and would learn about something completely interesting and different.

(01:20:46):
So, those are the three that I chose. The drone stuff, it actually was funny. I started flying here in DC. I live in Virginia, but maybe a mile outside of Washington DC and around DC there's a restricted air zone. And so after I did my FA drone pilot license and I became a certified drone pilot, I really went down the rabbit hole of trying to figure out how to fly a drone in DC, because I've seen them around, but obviously it's a national security and I'm probably dramatically mutilating the exact experience. But as I went to do this, it was very complicated, archaic, but also funny because it was all online. You have to go file out a form, you get a letter from a local representative who says you're in good standing. So, we found a councilman that I just knew. And then you have to fill out all the stuff.

(01:21:39):
This paperwork, the site looks like it's from 1994. There's an office literally in DC where a person approves you. Then you have to let go and get a police officer to effectively babysit you while you fly this drone. And so I did all that and I got to the point where I was going to get babysat and I called our local police department and I was like, yeah. So, I talked to the office, I just need an officer to come out and meet at this time. And they just laughed me off the phone.

(01:22:04):
They're like, we're not going to send a police officer to watch you fly a drone. And I just thought the thing was really funny because yeah, it makes sense. Why would they waste taxpayer dollars to have me fly a drone? But it was a requirement. So, I ended up not being able to fly this drone in DC. But if anybody's listening and they know how to fly a drone and they want to fly, I would be totally down. I have two drones. I have a Mavic Air 2 and a Skydio Enterprise, which Skydio is a really cool company as well if people are looking for drones.

Lenny (01:22:33):
Okay, so you're saying if people have an awesome drone and they live in Virginia, they should come contact you and fly some drones together?

Austin Hay (01:22:38):
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. But just not in DC.

Lenny (01:22:42):
All right. Well, Austin, I think we delivered on the promise of making this extremely nerdy and in the weeds, and I think we've solved a lot of people's problems. I feel a lot of gratitude for you, and I feel like we taught a lot of people about MarTech, which was my goal. So, thank you again for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to ask you more questions? And how can listeners be useful to you other than coming to fly drones with you?

Austin Hay (01:23:05):
So, first find me online LinkedIn. Threads, I actually have Threads. I don't have Twitter, like hot take, I think Twitter ruins people's careers. I've already seen multiple careers ruined by Twitter. Some people just don't know how to shut their mouth. So, I'm not on Twitter, but I am on Threads and I'm trying to figure it out. So, if you want to document Threads, you can. I'm on LinkedIn and then I have my email address on LinkedIn too, and I'm always willing to talk to people.

Lenny (01:23:28):
Amazing. And is there any way listeners can be useful to you?

Austin Hay (01:23:31):
Yes. I have a marketing technology course coming out with Reforge in the fall. If you're a practitioner of MarTech or you're interested in MarTech, would totally love for you to take the course, would love to your feedback in particular. I love to stand on this podcast and act like I know a lot about MarTech, but I'm still learning. And so I think it would be awesome to just get feedback from the community about what was interesting and helpful, what wasn't there, and we can improve upon. And then the other thing is, if you're ever looking for MarTech help and you want to reach out, that's great.

Lenny (01:24:02):
Amazing. Austin, thank you again so much for being here.

Austin Hay (01:24:04):
Thank you for having me, Lenny. It was a pleasure.

Lenny (01:24:07):
The pleasure was all mine. Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You're early growth PM at Facebook. You're head of growth at Instagram, you're VP of product at Instacart. You're now director of product management at YouTube and I've heard that you've had a lot of impact on a lot of different cultures.

Bangaly Kaba (00:00:10):
I found this framework travels with me. It's got these five components to it, vision, skills, incentives, resources, action plan, and you need all of those to have change. And then within those buckets you've got to figure out what are the right levers that you need to pull? What are the things that are missing?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:26):
You're really big on something you call understand work?

Bangaly Kaba (00:00:29):
What I call the anti-paren of what we want to do. Someone says, "Hey, you know what? This would be great to build." And you go pull data to go justify why that would be great to build. Call that identify, justify, execute. First you have to really understand from first principles what is actually going on. So understand, identify, execute.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:45):
You wrote this legendary blog post called How to Choose Where to Work and What to work on.

Bangaly Kaba (00:00:50):
There's impact that you're really trying to drop and the impact is only achievable by looking at set of variables related to the environment, the set of variables related to your skills.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:02):
Today's guest is Bengaly Kaba. Bengaly was an early growth PM at Facebook where he was responsible for how people make friends on Facebook. He was Head of Growth at Instagram where he helped scale a platform to over 1 billion users. He was also VP of product at Instacart. He's also worked with tons of amazing startups as a Growth Advisor, including Twitter. He's now Director of Product Management at YouTube where from what I hear, he's already made a huge dent. This conversation went long because there was so much gold to be extracted from Bengaly's head and I could not stop myself from learning everything I could in our time together. This episode is for anyone looking to level up their product and growth chops or also just do better in your career.

(00:01:42):
We dig into his framework for how to choose where to work and what to work on. The importance of spending time on something he calls understand work, his adjacent user theory and how it can help you drive growth. A bunch of advice for coaching product managers and managers of managers, tons of lessons and stories from his time at Instagram, Facebook and YouTube and so much more.

(00:02:03):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Bengaly Kaba.

(00:02:18):
Bengaly, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Bangaly Kaba (00:02:22):
Thanks for having me. Excited to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:24):
So many previous guests have recommended that I get you on this podcast, which I already knew. Funny story, when I first launched this podcast, I asked you to be on it. You're like, "Sure." And I included you on my launch poster of all the guests that are going to be on the podcast, and then you decided to take on a very hard work and jobs that kept you from having time, and so I'm really excited that we're finally doing this.

Bangaly Kaba (00:02:47):
I'm glad we're finally making a reality. Sorry about that, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:50):
No sweat. You actually mentioned to me that somebody came up to you in Zurich and was like, "I'm excited for you on Lenny's podcast."

Bangaly Kaba (00:02:57):
Yeah, it was crazy. I was visiting a team that I managed there about to get back on a plane to go back to SFO and just standing there doing some work, minding my business and I get on the plane, I'm talking to a colleague and someone comes up to me, I don't think I've ever seen them before, and said, "Hey, sorry to interrupt you. I'm so excited for your podcast with Lenny. I can't wait for it." And then just walks away and I was like, "What is going on right now? Lenny is a big deal. I don't even know how this person knows me." And that's how I knew Lenny, that I had to reschedule with you because I was like, if people are coming up to me and telling me that they're excited, I was like, there is a lot of anticipation. And Lenny, the power of your reach now is legit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:37):
That is hilarious. That's a new strategy for me to get people on the podcast just say they're going to be on the podcast and then the pressure will start.

Bangaly Kaba (00:03:46):
Oh yeah, I mean, totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:46):
Okay, so there's two broad topics that I want to spend our time on today. I want to talk about career advice and growth advice and they're both essentially growth oriented, one's career growth, one is product growth. How does that sound?

Bangaly Kaba (00:03:57):
Sounds perfect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:58):
This episode is brought to you by Wizard, empowering product leaders to ideate and iterate faster than ever before. With the power of AI. As a product manager, I often spend hours taking screenshots and then annotating them with feedback for my team. With Wizard, I can simply upload my screenshot and Wizards AI will turn them into a fully editable UI design that I can then take, make tweaks to and then share with my teams in minutes. And when I want to get really creative and explore totally new ways to improve our product experience, I can use Wizard's AI to generate new design concepts from simple text prompts and turn them into interactive prototypes effortlessly. There's a reason that over 2.6 million people have trusted Wizard to accelerate every phase of their product lifecycle and speed up time to market. Developers can even export UI components to React and CSS to speed up their development.

(00:04:52):
Wizards drag and drop editor is super easy to use and you can collaborate in real time with your entire team. Even your CO and customer service teams can contribute. Unlock all of Wizards game changing AI powered features and more with 25% off Wizards Pro annual plan. Visit uizard.io/lenny and use code: Lenny to check out today. That's uizard.io/lenny.

(00:05:20):
This episode is brought to you by Mercury. Mercury knows your financial operations are complex. It doesn't have to be this way. I've been a super happy customer at Mercury for over a year now, and it's honestly hard to imagine a better online banking experience can exist. Most founders and finance teams have to couple together a patchwork of tools to reconcile transactions from different sources, work extra hard just to get a holistic view of cash flow and have maps to company priorities, and struggle to get answers from platforms that all speak different languages.

(00:05:52):
Mercury knows that there's an art to simplifying this complex patchwork with new bill pay and accounting capabilities, you can pay bills faster, stay in control of company's spend and speed up reconciliation. The end result is the precision, control and focus that startups need to transform how they operate.

(00:06:10):
Apply in minutes at mercury.com and join over 200,000 ambitious startups like mine that trust Mercury to get them to perform at their best. Mercury, the art of Simplified Finances.

(00:06:23):
Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank & Trust. Members FDIC. So let's maybe start with the career. You wrote this legendary blog post called How to Choose Where to Work and What to Work On that a few people have mentioned to me was really impactful in their career. And just to remind people of your career path, which they'll hear in the intro, but just to give people a reason to listen to your advice on career, you are early growth PM at Facebook, you're Head of Growth at Instagram, you're VP of Product at Instacart. You worked with a ton of amazing startups as an advisor, including Twitter, you're now Director of Product Management at YouTube. This is a career that many people would dream of having. So let's just spend a little time on this topic of how to choose where to work and what to work on. And I know you kind of have this framework in this post, so maybe that's a good way to start out just how you broadly think about where to work and what to work on?

Bangaly Kaba (00:07:18):
Yeah, that blog post that you're referring to actually came out of a personal struggle that I had when I was at Facebook and trying to decide what my next move should be. I felt like I was kind of stuck. I felt like I was working harder but not seeing incremental benefit to the work that I was doing. And I knew that I needed a change, but emotionally I understood that, but I couldn't really have an objective way of thinking about it. And so I really pushed myself to figure out what is actually going on with my situation and how do I create a way that I can rely on objectively to understand what's actually going on? And so I looked at that situation and I wrote that post and the framework is really that there's impact that you're really trying to drive and that is the thing that is the most important. And the impact is only achievable by looking at two sets of variables, a set of variables related to the environment, a set of variables related to your skills, and really breaking down each and understanding what's happening in the environment bit by bit and what's happening with your skills and where are you hindered structurally within the environment? Where are your skills kind of lacking and what do you have control over? And using that whole kind of output, that framework to decide what makes the most sense.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:40):
Why is impact the key output of this equation? I think for a lot of people that isn't necessarily the intuitive variable that they think is important to focus on. Why is that so important in your experience?

Bangaly Kaba (00:08:51):
Yeah, I mean I didn't really know how to think about what the right thing to optimize for was initially, and I realized that it's not compensation. Compensation is a reflection of the input, the impact that you're having, and you're leveling how [inaudible 00:09:12] you are, how much scope you have is a derivative of how much impact you're driving. The more impact you're driving at your company, the more people feel like you can operate independently, you can drive real results the more that scope they'll give you. So really impact became the thing to optimize for. It is the import and compensation becomes an output based on that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:32):
I think this is a really important point that is easy to miss and this is what I always tell people when they're looking for ways to get promoted and do well in companies, just find ways to have more impact. Can you maybe make it even more concrete? What does impact mean to you when you talk about impact?

Bangaly Kaba (00:09:46):
Yeah, I mean, so impact can be a lot of things, but I think for a product manager for example, it's really one, helping to drive extreme clarity about where the problems with the product, where there's opportunities and what is the right focus and prioritization? That is actually a form of impact. Just creating the clarity that people need to understand and believe in the investment. The reason why I name this and it feels a little counterintuitive is that the more senior you get, the more there are questions of are we even investing in the right place, right? Is this area, is this team, is this org the right investment? And so being able to even create the clarity that there is opportunity, it is the right thing to do, it is strategically and structurally important, is a form of impact. And then actually delivering on that impact, showing that you can make progress quickly, that you can deliver fast lane wins as Casey Winters would say, or medium and slow wins and then actually showing that you can do this again and again is how you actually validate the impact that you can see where the opportunity is and what's going on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:53):
Awesome. Okay. So this equation is impact equals environment type skills. Can you talk a bit about how to work on these two elements?

Bangaly Kaba (00:11:01):
So the environment was the one to me, that I think is most people overlook and I overlooked when I was first thinking about this. Environment in this case, I think I kind of discreetly named a few things. One is your manager, then there's the resources. So what kind of team do you have? Is your team staffed appropriately? Do you have the right P&L, whatever budget to get the things done that you need? Then there's a scope, what is in your remit versus not in your remit? Because if you don't have enough scope, then you can't actually focus on the things that are most important. The team itself, the skills, relative skills of the team, your compensation in some ways is part of the environment because if you're not compensated fairly, you don't believe you are, then it's hard to feel like the work that you're doing is meaningful.

(00:11:47):
And then there is the last part is the company culture. So to what extent is the culture a place where you feel supported, included, you feel like you can do your best work? And so you are really looking at each one of these variables, and I look at this every year and I say, "How is my manager doing?" How do I think about my manager? How do I think about the resources I have, the scope, the team, the conversation, the company culture and to what extent? And I score them, I score them as a 1 means it's kind of neutral. A 2 means that I'm greatly benefiting from this situation and something even closer to zero is I'm not in a good place. So I assign a score in quarter point increments, 0.25, 0.5, 0.751 up to 2 every year. And I really ask myself, what is the state of each one of these and to what extent do I believe that they can and will change?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:40):
Wow, I love this. So there's this formula, impact equals environment times skills. Within environment there's these five variables and they add up to 10?

Bangaly Kaba (00:12:49):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:50):
If they each give you two points. That's so cool. Okay, so the five, just to be clear, your manager, the resources you have, is teams number three?

Bangaly Kaba (00:12:58):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:59):
Compensation and then the culture of the team?

Bangaly Kaba (00:13:02):
And then your scope as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:03):
And then scope. Okay, got it.

Bangaly Kaba (00:13:04):
It's actually six, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:05):
Oh, there's six. Okay, got it. So it's up to 12. So the idea here is you score each of these of how you're feeling, how the environment is contributing to the impact that you're delivering. And if one of these is not a great score, that's an opportunity to improve your impact, which will improve your career?

Bangaly Kaba (00:13:26):
That's right, and you have to really be honest. I think part of what makes this framework so powerful for me at least, is that it helps you to be honest around what are the things that are limiting your ability to have impact and for your skills to really land? And to what extent do you believe that you can help to change or try to influence the change in the environment? Because no one wants to be in a place where there's a bad culture and the culture is a bad fit for you, but if you're not really thinking about it objectively and naming that, or maybe it's the culture of the team that is not the right place for you, so it really forces you to evaluate what's going on around you that's limiting your impact.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:05):
Is there an example from your career you could share where one of these was not where it needed to be and either helped change it or realize you had to get out of there?

Bangaly Kaba (00:14:14):
When I was actually at Facebook, I was running the team that does all the people recommendations and it was a great team. I actually had a massive, massive team. I had 30 engineers I was working with, 15 machine learning engineers and 15 front end and back end engineers. And so great team, incredible team, lot of resources, ton of scope. In some ways it was too much scope and to me that was problematic because I really needed to build out, I felt like multiple teams to support the work that we were doing or to break it up; because it was, I mean the pace, the velocity you can imagine at Facebook was incredible. And I felt like between all of the work that we needed to do, the amount of engineering capacity that we had and the amount that was on the table, I felt like I wasn't resourced in a way where I felt like I could actually deliver on all of the things that were necessary without burning myself out. And I felt like I was burning myself out and I couldn't really see the forest through the trees because there was so much to do.

(00:15:20):
And so that was a situation that I didn't really understand how to navigate at that point in my career. And there were two or three manager changes concurrently, and so I didn't have a manager to lean on that I felt like I had a relationship with to help me to navigate that space. And I felt like the scope was actually too much for what needed to be done, and so I needed to find a better kind of fit for me. There was nothing wrong with the team, it was a great learning environment, but it was the confluence of scope and manager and all happening at once just wasn't a good fit for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:53):
A lot of people are in these situations where they'd say they go through this score, they identify I have way too little scope, way too much scope like you described, and there's always this question of can I actually make a change or is this just not, am I not in a position? Especially, I see product managers, there's just always a lot of, I can't actually change anything. What do you often tell people around this that just feel like there's nothing I can do here and my manager sucks, what am I going to do?

Bangaly Kaba (00:16:17):
Well, I do think one of the things that I recognize is your manager. Not all of these variables is created equal and the manager is the most important variable in the environment, because a great manager who is empathetic, who is aware of what's going on, who is a great communicator, has the ability to move the chess pieces around and to fix some of these for you either immediately or in time. There's no one other than your manager who can really help to increase your scope or to help make sure that the team has the right pieces in place, or dial in some of the issues that you might see in culture.

(00:16:56):
And so that is why people say they don't leave a job, they leave a manager because the manager is the one that has a lot of the power to fix a lot of these variables. And so really the question becomes like to what extent have you been able to clearly articulate what are the... And dispassionately articulate, what are the challenges that you're having, you're seeing across some of these variables with your manager? Help them to tie it back to how it's impacting your work and see if they can help you to create a plan to alleviate some of these things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:28):
That's super interesting. Then your experience with the manager is kind of the core of a lot of these variables. Is there anything you recommend to people if their managers is not someone they like, is it just try to find a new manager or potentially leave?

Bangaly Kaba (00:17:39):
You're never going to always like your manager, right? That's not the... The goal isn't to like your manager. Ideally, you respect them and they respect you, you feel like there's things that you can learn from them. Finding a new manager is always an option, but I guess sometimes the real question is, is actually spending time to try to understand what is your manager optimizing? A lot of times I think there is a big disconnect between an IC focusing on their discrete area and try to optimize for local maxima, versus understanding, okay, my manager's thinking about these things and this is how I fit in, and understanding maybe they have a gap to understanding why your area is important. Or maybe there's stuff that's on your manager's plate that is actually adjacent to your remit that if you understood that they were optimizing for, you can take that on and you would find more synergies with what they're trying to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:28):
I love that advice. Let's talk about the other side of this equation. We've talked about environment, let's talk about skills. What do you advise there for folks that want to improve their skills?

Bangaly Kaba (00:18:37):
The skills part is really, really big and it's something that requires I think, consistent evolution of your own abilities. And so I broke it out in that blog post kind of communication, your ability to influence your leadership, strategic thinking and then execution, actually getting things done. The communication above these, again, not all of these are created equal. I think communication is the one that tends to be the most impactful. And you see this in a lot of ways. You see this for people who are poor executors but incredible communicators and they seem to continue to rise and rise because they can tell a great story, but when you look under the covers, there's nothing there. There's no substance there.

(00:19:17):
So communication for better or worse is one of the most important things. But building out your skills I think is really just kind of a, it is an interesting time to be in product and to be in tech right now because you have so many more ways to build out your skills than what previously existed. Just so many incredible blog posts like your podcasts and blogs, there's so many incredible people who've come on here who tell you things like how to go to market, how to think about B2B SaaS and metrics. And so listening to you, reading Ben Thompson, understanding his mental models, if you go to look at Elena Verner or whoever, there's so many thought leaders who are out there.

(00:19:56):
So I think being a voracious reader is really, really critical because it helps to build your toolkit and you need arrows in your quiver to really understand how to think about the right framework and the right mentor at the right time.

(00:20:09):
One thing I also tell people is people think about mentorship as like, I have a mentor, Lenny is my mentor, or John is my mentor. I tell them, it's actually better to have a stable of mentors. You want to have three or four. And ideally, what you do is you meet with each one of them once a month on a different Friday of the month. And so you might have three or four people on every Friday you're meeting with someone different. And the reason why this is so important is because if you, Lenny, are a mentor to me and you're busy one Friday and we only meet once a month now I don't have anyone to talk to for two months. And you're going through a lot of things and you're not really able to bounce ideas, or build skills or learn how influence others, but if you have three or four mentors, you have someone different to talk to every week. And if one or two of them cancel, you still have two people to talk to that month and you still can continue to grow and to build your thinking.

(00:21:01):
So that's something I always recommend. And then the last thing I actually talk about is, when it comes to execution, I think people don't, especially product managers, don't do enough of watching and learning from others. There's an art and a science to product management. And in a lot of ways I come from a background of education and in a lot of ways in product management, it's very similar. You want to watch how well the people hone their craft, how they deliver, how they lead teams and kind of steal things from them. Figure out, well, wow, Lenny did this really, really well when he was at Airbnb. It was really incredible. I'm going to take that. I'm going to take how he runs that team, or how he landed that framework, or how he communicated this message and note it and use it in my own toolkit later on. And so if you're really a student of product, you can't just be a student of theory, you've got to be a student of practice too, meaning you're going and you're looking, it's like, "Hey, I'd love to sit in your team meetings. Can I come watch? Or your PM meetings or your leadership meetings." And you are really like doing that for the sake of learning is really, really incredible. And that's some of the ways I talk about building skills.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:05):
Is there an example of that latter lesson that you learned from someone that comes to mind of watching someone and like, oh, I'm going to do that.

Bangaly Kaba (00:22:13):
Earlier in my career, when I first got to Instagram, I wasn't the first Growth PM, but I was one of the first and a guy who was there before me, his name was Georgia Lee, he actually stood up the growth team and ended up leaving six months right after I joined. But I watched, George was a really good listener. He had just a really incredible ability to be in a room and hear what was going on, to recast it back and make sure that everyone felt good about where we were and what was being said and the path forward, and really crystallizing the action items and also how people felt about what the next steps were. And walking out of that meeting, it felt like he always had buy-in and clarity and was helpful to build trust. You can see him almost winning trust in every moment of that meeting. And that was something that I really admired, and learned, and kind sought to emulate later on in my career.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:15):
That's an awesome example. It comes back to the skill of communication that you talked about, just the power becoming really good at that. And this is such a simple skill you just described, is just recapping, here's what we talked about. Here's what we're going to do. Here's the decisions we made. Here's action items. It's not actually difficult, it's just-

Bangaly Kaba (00:23:30):
It's not, actually. But what was magical about the way he did it. It's like he would name people and their contributions and show how all of this came together into what is the path forward.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:41):
That is amazing.

Bangaly Kaba (00:23:41):
And it's the communication, but it's also the other side. It's the other coin, the side of communication, which is eliciting to figure out how you communicate back to others.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:49):
So good. Following up on something else you talked about, which is mentors. Anytime someone talks about finding mentors, everyone's always, how do I find a mentor? What advice do you share with folks of how to find a mentor to help? You say once a week or once a month?

Bangaly Kaba (00:24:03):
Where I see people find the most success is they ask. They tell people what they're working on or what challenges they have and they say, "Do you know someone who I might be able to learn from who has done this or has good thinking about this recently?" So instead of just going to someone saying, "Hey, can you be a mentor?" Coming to me and say, "Hey, Bengaly, I'm actually trying to figure out how do I change the way this team operates because we need to go from this model to that model, but here's some of the challenges. So do you know someone who's actually really good at changing the way teams work or really good at communicating a new vision that I can talk to?"

(00:24:40):
And so that I think is really important because what you do is you're creating a seed, and the seed is there's a triad and you have the person who's looking for the mentor. You have the recommender, the recommender, and then you have the potential mentor. And the recommender is basically saying, "Here, there's common purpose between the two of you and I can see it, and I think this is important, so I want you all to come together." And that triad in that moment creates a higher affinity, highly likelihood that the person who needs the help and the person who you're connecting them with are going to see mutual benefit from one another. And I think I find that just doing that and seeding that and being really focused on what the opportunity or the challenge is, tends to lead to better connections as opposed to just reaching out and saying, "Hey, I like your style. Will you be my mentor?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:30):
So essentially share with folks you trust, here's what I'm working on. See if they recommend someone that could help you with that specific skill versus assuming that there's this person that can help you with this skill?

Bangaly Kaba (00:25:40):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:41):
I love it. Going back to your advice on career, something that you wrote about in your post plus folks have told me you're really big on, is this something you call understand work? Does that ring a bell?

Bangaly Kaba (00:25:53):
Yes, it does.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:53):
Okay. Talk about that and why that's important?

Bangaly Kaba (00:25:56):
I certainly cannot take credit for understand work. This is part of an old Facebook framework of understand, identify, execute. What I-

Bangaly Kaba (00:26:00):
Facebook framework of understand, identify, execute. What I probably will say is I guess I've been the shepherd for understand work in other companies. I've taken it from my time at Facebook and Relink Institute or rigorously at Instagram, then at Instacart and when I helped with Twitter, now at YouTube. The way I like to talk about it with my teams is that first I tell a story actually, and the story is we've all had a moment where we have worked on something with a team, super excited, finally it launches and we go out to dinner and we celebrate. And we're celebrating, everyone's juiced. It's great night. You go back to the office the next day and you look at the metrics and the metrics are flat and everyone's a little bummed. Why did this happen? Right. Why are the metrics flat? What happened? We worked so hard.

(00:26:49):
And ultimately when you unpack it, you realize that you built something that you thought was going to be a good idea, but you really didn't understand a lot of key components of what people really needed, what pain points really existed, or what were the alternatives and what the real value of those alternatives were in the market, or exactly how the product needed to work, what the flywheel or what the experience needed to be. And so that is what I call the anti-pattern of what we want to do and I call that identify, justify, execute. Right. Where you identify something, someone says, "Hey, you know what? This would be great to build." And you identify that, then you go pull data to go justify why that would be great to build and then you sink an ungodly amount of time working on it in order to make it work, but it ultimately doesn't succeed.

(00:27:36):
And that is the anti-pattern to what is kind of like the Facebook kind of way of thinking, which is understand, identify, execute, right? So first you have to really understand from first principles what is actually going on. So when we talk about understand work, there's a few ways to think about it. One is, it is an intentional affordance in your execution to do the work that helps you to de-risk a project and to learn what's going on. When I say an intentional affordance, meaning you put it down like Lenny is going to work on this thing. Right. Lenny as a product manager is going to write a strategy. Janice as a designer is going to design a prototype, whatever the thing is, and you put it down as actual an item as opposed to assuming it's going to happen in the background. We don't make an affordance for understand work, then the work doesn't get done and everyone's just sprinting on execution.

(00:28:27):
And so it's a planned intentional time to the team's bandwidth to figure out what is it that we need to do to understand what's happening. And so for example at Instagram we did a lot of understand work of what makes for a good connection? Right. How do we want to think about that? How do we want to make sure that we're actually growing a graph, a social graph that makes sense? And so I might work with data science to do understand work, to pull a funnel and look at the different types of connections for different types of users and make it make sense. Right. And engineering might do understand work to instrument logging to make sure that we have the data that we need in order to tell the story. And so you're doing this understand work to basically better understand the gaps in knowledge. What's also really interesting is that understand work helps you to clarify what is a root cause, or what is a job to be done, or what is the right use case?

(00:29:25):
And because the team adopts this mentality, it becomes this forcing function for execution. So when someone says, "You know what we should build? We should build this." You have a team that's enabled and empowered to say, "That's a good idea, but we don't actually understand these three things before we start working on that. So maybe we should do understand work to make sure that that is actually the right idea." Right. And so what you end up getting by embracing this concept is two things. You get parallel paths of work. So every sprint, let's say you do a three-week sprint or a three-month roadmap, you're executing on the things that you have a lot of conviction around and you're also doing understand work in parallel. And so at the end of the sprint you have learnings from what you executed. Wow, that test or that launch worked really well. We should double down. Or Wow, that test or launch didn't work. Here's how we should pivot. And you have insights from the understand work and you use both of those to plan the next sprints or roadmap. Right.

(00:30:29):
And so because you have this parallel path, you end up getting this velocity multiplier over time. Right. So the next sprint, and the third sprint, and the fourth sprint, every subsequent sprint you de-risk new ideas, you've gotten more clarity. And so you do more execution, you do better execution and you move faster and the things you ship, you have a higher win rate on the things you ship, right? And your shipping, I remember when I left Instagram, this is many years ago, but we had 15 teams and we might've been running 12 to 20 experiments a quarter a team, and I would say probably 60 to 70% of them were positive and shippable, which is incredible. I mean, you think about and multiple and the magnitude of that and it was because we were so effective at de-risking and understanding what was going on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:18):
This is really interesting. I imagine many people listening here are like, we put time into understanding, we run experiments, we write strategy docs, we use research. What is it that you think people are, where do you think they're missing? Is it that you dedicate people's actual time, like you're just doing understand work instead of building a new thing. For this next sprint, you're just going to be telling us what the problem here or opportunity is. How do you actually operationalize this versus just what people probably already do, which is user research, data dives?

Bangaly Kaba (00:31:47):
What I found is a couple things. One is when your team does not fully understand a problem space, the balance of work tends to be higher. I think when I started at YouTube we were doing 60% execution, 40% understand work. Right. And over time, as we understand more and more, the mix shifts. Now my teams are probably doing 80% execution, 20 to or 85% and 20 to 15% understand work.

(00:32:18):
And so it's not just about writing a strategy, it's about saying, okay, if we have these themes of stuff that we want to work on, what do we know with confidence because the data tells us and what do we need to understand because we don't have the data, we don't have the research, we don't have the insights? And really being honest with yourselves around what are the things that are low to medium effort but high likelihood of being impactful because you have the data and what are the things that you are interested in perhaps doing, but because you're missing something, you're missing research or feedback from users or data or some insights or strategy. You should actually say, I'm going to go do this before I do something else. Right.

(00:33:03):
An example of this is one of my teams ships paid virtual goods in the live experience on YouTube. And that's a really, really important and hard problem space. And when I joined, we didn't really fully understand the whole live ecosystem, like how we lived in that live ecosystem, how our products worked, where the biggest opportunity was. So the first and most important piece of understand work was instead of shipping iterations to the current product, we needed to actually get the funnel of what was happening. Right. Like what's happening with how many people are watching live every day, how many people are clicking through, how many people are seeing our experience, how many people actually buying it? We didn't really fully have the experience mapped out and to understand where were the gaps and where are the problem space is in, where should we be focusing?

(00:33:52):
And so we had to do that. And that was understand work for multiple people, for multiple teams. We had to do on the engineering side, we needed data science as analysis. We needed the PM to go and dog through the experience to figure out what was broken. All of that was intentional and an affordance on our roadmaps.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:08):
What's interesting about this is that this is very counterintuitive to how people would probably approach, hey, we need to speed up execution, we need to speed up growth, we need to ship more, execute, go faster, do more. And what you're saying is you find the impact comes from actually slow down how much we're doing and spend more time understanding to execute more intelligently.

Bangaly Kaba (00:34:32):
That's right. Slow down and speed up.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:33):
Fascinating. Because it's interesting, I have a bunch of questions that emerged out of folks that you've worked with and many of them are around how you turn a culture around, speed things up, and drive growth in a really meaningful way. And it sounds like this is one of your key strategies, is get people to spend more time understanding before diving into a bunch of stuff.

Bangaly Kaba (00:34:54):
It does sound counterintuitive, but if you actually think about it, what is a better outcome? Is it a better outcome to just ship more faster now, but most of the things aren't unimpactful? Right. Or is it a better outcome to ship fewer things but really work on making sure that you're shipping them in the best way and de-risking a lot of other things so that a year later your win rate's higher and your velocity is higher?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:19):
Yeah, I think counterintuitive is the wrong word. I think it makes sense. I think it's just no one does this. Usually everyone's like, move faster, we need more and ship more experiments.

Bangaly Kaba (00:35:28):
Well, I mean this is the irony of growth, is people think growth is overnight success and it's not. Right. It is a lot of short wins and short-term execution for a longer-term gain and really understanding you have a lot of short terms towards the longer-term outcomes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:48):
So that people can take away this lesson, can you help people understand just when you say understand work, like what does that look like generally? Is it just a dedicated time to dive into data and answer a bunch of questions you've sent them? Is it running experiments to test hypotheses? What does that usually look like when you're, here let's do 40% understand work?

Bangaly Kaba (00:36:10):
The understand work sometimes comes from me, but most often comes from the teams themselves. And every function can do and should be doing understand work at some point. Right. And so it really depends on what the function is. So for an engineer, it could be looking at the code and saying, okay, we want to improve this. I need to do understand work to understand do we need to refactor this code and how scalable is it and what do we need to do to make sure that we can execute fast and make sure that we're not going to have a lot of start and stop? That could be understand work. It could be actually instrumenting the data and making sure that we actually have full visibility into what's going on. Data science, like we work a lot with data science doing activation metrics and understanding proxy metrics. Right. That's understand work because it helps us to figure out what we need to build and where to focus.

(00:37:05):
For product management, sometimes understand work is figuring out the partnership strategy ahead of actually launching the product because you need to go figure out how the pieces are going to come together. Right. And so it really just depends on what the function is. But when I say it should be coming from the bottoms up, what I mean is I encourage the team when we plan a sprint or plan a roadmap, to ask a question to identify the key themes that they need to work on. And when they ask a question on a key theme, also ask what else do we need to understand to make this happen? And in that planning session, to make sure that you are including cross-functional partners. So it's not just product design and data science and Inge, you also include go to market, you also include marketing because if you're not inclusive, then you don't really understand what the issues are.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:55):
My PM brain is afraid of creating too much understand work and nothing getting done. How do you find that balance of we're going to be understanding for hours and days and weeks and months and not shipping much? How do you do some,-

Bangaly Kaba (00:38:11):
I tell them, you have to ship. I mean, you always have to ship, right? Sometimes I give them, sometimes it's helpful, especially early on because it takes a while for people to get their head around why this is so critical. I say, we should choose, sometimes I'll give them guidance. We should choose three to four understand projects that are going to really help this roadmap and figure out what they are. Right. So choose your top three or four and then let's talk about it. And I'll give them guidance. Or I would say figure out... There should always be some execution. So initially you're looking for low effort, high impact things to execute against. Right.

(00:38:53):
And so build a portfolio of work to do every sprint or every roadmap, some of which should be low effort, high impact, some of which should be medium effort, high impact. And sometimes understand work actually looks like doing a cheap test, doing a test that's going to help us to learn as fast as possible that we think is a good enough experience that can inform us. Right. And so identifying ways to do that. And so it's really about just managing expectations and helping people to be clear that the goal is to ship the product, but you want to ship the things that you have more confidence and understanding versus not.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:29):
So I think a big takeaway here is if you want to have more impact, move faster, try to spend a little more time understanding the problems you're going after in the opportunity space.

Bangaly Kaba (00:39:40):
That's right. Right. I'll give you a very tactical example is when I joined Instagram in January 2016, believe it or not, the onboarding, the sign-up flow at Instagram had literally no logging to it. It had logging of how many people started and how many people ended. Right. And I joined in January and it was like we had to write a roadmap. And so the roadmap looked like this. Okay, we know this amount at the top of the funnel and this amount at the bottom end of the funnel. And there was eight steps in the funnel and we don't know what is going on. Right. So the first bit of understand work was we needed to do the instrumentation of that funnel as fast as possible to get the data to figure out where the drops were happening and what to fix. But because we knew of what was happening at the top of the funnel and the bottom of the funnel, we can go and play around with the experience and see what was broken.

(00:40:32):
So we ran a bunch of tests of stuff that was obviously broken to see what would improve. Right. And so it was like a mix. And so what we did was we set up time where we did, the beginning of like the first couple of weeks, add the logging, ship it to code, re-evaluate in the middle of the quarter, look at the full funnel and then add more things that we can do later on once we got that. But in order to get that done, that involved understand work with growth marketing to figure out what was the schemas for the instrumentation, right, the engineering to actually do that logging. Right. Data science to like pull together funnels and dashboard it, all of that had to come together all at one time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:08):
I really like just this concept of calling it understand work. I think that alone is a powerful tool because we're going to spend more time on understand work.

Bangaly Kaba (00:41:15):
It feels like it gives meaning to stuff that otherwise people would brush aside.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:18):
Right. Where it's just like, no, no, let's just ship stuff. Let's just try stuff. Let's just test the step. We'll see what happens.

Bangaly Kaba (00:41:25):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:26):
Is there anything else you have seen and often do to help a team you join move faster and grow bigger? And I've heard that you've had a lot of impact on a lot of different cultures, so I'm curious if there's anything else that is really effective.

Bangaly Kaba (00:41:42):
I've found myself in a bunch of interesting situations where I had to come in and help improve cultures or change cultures around teams. I found this framework, I don't even actually remember where I got it from, but it travels from computer to computer with me and team to team, and it's called managing complex change. I actually think I got it from business school or something. And it's really interesting. It's got these five components to it. There's vision, skills, incentives, resources, action plan, and you need all of those to have change. Right. Team needs to have vision, they need to have the skills, they need to have the right incentives. Sometimes some teams are incentivized to do some things versus others. You need to have the right resources in the right places and you need to have a clear action plan. And what I love about this framework is if you can visualize it and maybe you can share it with your podcast.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:34):
Yeah. We'll put it up on the screen on YouTube so folks can see what you're talking about.

Bangaly Kaba (00:42:38):
Basically what it does is it shows where if you're missing any one component, you get different outcomes. Right. So if you're missing the vision component, you end up in a state of confusion or if you're missing the incentives, you end up in a state of resistance because people aren't incentivized to do the right work. Or if you're missing an action plan, you end up in a state of false starts. So I use this, and I think about this a lot actually, because when you come in as a leader, as someone who's supposed to influence change, you have to really observe what's happening and figure out what are the challenges anecdotally and what are you observing? And then I figure out where I can plug in and what I can do to make the teams better. And what I tend to find is moving from the right side to the left side of this, like action plans are easier to institute. Right.

(00:43:27):
So if I see a team that's struggling to execute, I wonder do they have the right type of PRD framework or are they communicating well? Do they have the right type of team meeting structures? Those are kind of lower hanging fruit. It's a lot harder to change vision and skills. It will come in time. But what I also have done over the course of my career is I've built this deck that comes with me of different skills that matter. Right. What are different skills, what are different frameworks, how do we think about it, to help level teams fast? Right. Because I find that sometimes you walk in and not everyone is grounded in the same mental models or concepts.

(00:44:07):
One example of this I talk about a lot is Instagram. Instagram had just this fantastic culture of thinking about how do we ship high, high quality product, right, and what does product craft mean? And so that is something that I came to YouTube and my teams particularly, they didn't have a mental model for product craft. So I found myself talking into an echo chamber in some way. So I had to build a deck that showed, okay, here's how I think about product craft. Here's a framework for it. Here's how I think about all of these different things. And so now we have a shared language, shared communication for, and a repository of skills that we're going to build.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:47):
So I'm looking at this image that we'll have up. So in this case, their skills weren't necessarily there, which in this framework leads to anxiety. And so what I'm hearing, essentially you come into a team, you're like, what am I feeling? Is it confusion, frustration, the wrong thing? And that kind of tells you which of these buckets to spend time on.

Bangaly Kaba (00:45:06):
That's right. And then within those buckets, you've got to figure out what are the right levers that you need to pull? What are the things that are missing? How do you really focus and where do you kind of spend your time?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:16):
So interesting. I love that this image is just like this very grainy,-

Bangaly Kaba (00:45:20):
So old.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:21):
Screenshot from some old McKinsey deck or something.

Bangaly Kaba (00:45:24):
Yeah. It's from like 2006 PC or something.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:26):
I love it. So you have this thing, you have this deck. You just come in with all these tools in your tool belt. Is there anything else in that list of things that you bring with you to help change culture and help teams,-

Bangaly Kaba (00:45:37):
Yeah. I think one thing I think about a bunch is I come from, my background's a little bit different than a traditional tech executive. There was actually three phases to my career. I was in education for six years, taught in inner city DC and then was a dean of a boarding school in Switzerland, which is a little bit of a plot twist.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:38):
Oh, wow.

Bangaly Kaba (00:45:58):
I went to business school and I worked on Wall Street for a bit, and then I left my job on Wall Street, quit and started a startup. Startup was a glorious failure as many startups are, but it was like a very non-traditional path towards tech. And I think a lot of my time in these other industries actually shapes the way I think about products and product management and actually changing teams and building teams. And what I mean by that is I think there's a lot of similarities between education and product management believe it or not.

(00:46:31):
When I was interviewing for my first set of jobs in tech, recruiters would say to me, "How does your background relate? I don't really see it." And I would tell them, "When I was in education, I would walk into a classroom of 24, seven-year olds, and these kids owed me nothing. And the only way I could be successful or impactful is I needed to be able to be a strong communicator. I needed to be able to have a clear vision of what was going on. I needed to be able to influence them in a believable way such that they would get on board with what needed to be done for 270 days of the year." It's like when you walk into a room as a product manager, engineers, designers, researchers go to market. Nobody owes you anything. And the only thing that you're going to do in order to be successful is you need to be a strong communicator. You have a clear vision of what's going on and you need to be able to influence them to do the things together of what matters, right? It's very similar skillset, just different domain expertise.

(00:47:29):
And so because of that, right, I've really adopted a mindset of how do I coach my teams? How do I enable them? Because it's really about the sum of the parts versus me being a top down leader saying, you have to do this and you have to do that. And so I think a lot about that in both approach and the processes that we create. And to give you a couple of classic typical examples of this, there's two things I want to call out. One is there's this, actually this education framework, it's called Bloom's Taxonomy. I think it's changed over time, but when I learned it, it was basically a pyramid and the pyramid was, Bloom Taxonomy describes what's the different levels or order of critical thinking you need in order to be a master of something? And at the bottom of the pyramid was knowledge, and then it's comprehension, and then application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. Right.

(00:48:26):
And so going up the pyramid, it means it's higher order thinking. And I think about that a lot and trying to understand where are my teams struggling? Do they have the core knowledge that they need? Do they understand it but they can't apply it or they apply it, but they're not able to analyze it across different business segments? Right. And you can use this framework not only with the ICPMs and the teams themselves, but also for your managers, like what is breaking down? And in using that and attaching that to the skills that we want to build to figure out how do you fill in those gaps? Right. And it really is a grounding for me, a grounding mental model for how do you build teams that are actually affect them? How do you meet people where they are as opposed to just saying, hey, you need to figure this out? Right. I find that too often in tech and also in product, people are ask to figure things out but not given the support to get there, and there's no way to really connect the dots for them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:21):
Amazing. I'm pulling up the Bloom's Taxonomy. So essentially if you see a PM struggling, which you try to do is figure out which of these things do they not have? How are you not supporting them? How can you support them better? So it could be they don't have the skills, they don't have the understanding. What are some of the other things that often you find that maybe hinder a product manager's success?

Bangaly Kaba (00:49:42):
A lot of times they might have the understanding, but they haven't had a chance to apply it to a variety of different scenarios or haven't seen it applied to multiple scenarios. Right. So oftentimes you might understand a concept like machine learning, but you haven't actually worked on it in against multiple scenarios. So you maybe have one way of doing it that doesn't make sense and you need to have two or three, and you don't even know that two or three ways of doing it exists. Right. That is often a common failure point. Right. Or it's maybe you know how to apply it, but you can't synthesize why this thing that you're doing actually matters for the business context. Right. Oftentimes that becomes a challenge with managers. It's like they know what to do, but they don't understand how to tie it back to the business context and the overall strategy needs and so where to prioritize. Right.

(00:50:31):
And so what I find is that when you're trying to manage managers, you're really trying to live at the top of the pyramid. You are responsible, managers responsible for basically owning that pyramid for all of the areas that they operate, but they need to be able to live at the top of the pyramid across all of them. They need to be able to synthesize and evaluate what's happening for each product team that they own in order to kind of make the bigger picture connections.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:56):
By the way, I loved your metaphor of product manager, like this group of seven-year-olds where you have to learn how to manage, influence, communicate.

Bangaly Kaba (00:50:56):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:56):
It's great.

Bangaly Kaba (00:51:05):
Yeah. I mean, they're not like a group of seven-year-olds,-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:07):
It's the skills.

Bangaly Kaba (00:51:07):
But I think it's actually, it's,-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:08):
Yeah, the same skills.

Bangaly Kaba (00:51:08):
Huh?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:09):
The same skills you,-

Bangaly Kaba (00:51:10):
Same skills.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:11):
Yeah.

Bangaly Kaba (00:51:12):
I mean, I think it's true. I found it actually significantly harder for me to get 24 seven-year-olds to believe in what I was doing then to walk into a room with Kevin Systrom and Mike Krieger and explain to them what's the strategy for growing the next 100 million users on Instagram? These are very logical adults who can reason with you, and you got a classroom of kids. It's not quite the same. So those skills are really critical.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:36):
I love that. I definitely want to ask about your Instagram days. Is there anything else in this bucket of wisdom of, you kind of talked about things you've learned about how to manage product managers and managers of managers. Is there anything else there that might be helpful to folks that you've learned?

Bangaly Kaba (00:51:50):
One thing that I also think about a lot, and I don't know if this is just a me thing, but I think about PM as a team sport. Right. Leading product teams is really about...

Bangaly Kaba (00:52:01):
Leading product teams is really about being the coach and helping other people to see what their role is on the team and to maximize them. People talk a lot about product as you're the CEO, and I don't actually fully believe that analogy. If you think about it as a team sport, there's a few things that shake out. One is not everyone's going to be a star player. But not everyone needs to be a LeBron James or Kobe Bryant. You need role players. You need really strong role players. You need people who feel valued in their role, and you need to understand how to groom those role players and how to make sure that they have the right seat at the table and the right place. So I think it's, yes, you're the conductor of the orchestra, but you're really more than that. You're really the coach of the team.

(00:52:46):
Another thing I think about a lot is I have a good friend who's a college basketball coach, and he taught me about this idea of your coaching tree. This is a really important concept, especially in college basketball. You, as a head coach, you take a lot of pride in who are your assistants. Who is your first assistant, second assistant, and third assistant? And where do they go on to be head coaches? And what legacy do they have because you were able to instill a bit in them? The coaching tree of a Mike Mike Krzyzewski, the coaching tree of a John Calipari, these esteemed coaches, not only because of what they've done, but because of the tree that they've built.

(00:53:26):
And I like to think about this as well, because I think it's really important for product leaders, think about what is their leadership tree. Who have you helped to build up and help to grow and help to get to their next wall? And so I think about this a lot. I have people who I've worked with who are running growth at Stripe or the CPO at Chief or now running stories at Instagram that were on my team in the earlier days. And their success is my success, and I'm proud for them, and I'm happy for them. And I think it kind of reinforces this mentality that it's your responsibility to coach people up to greatness.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:04):
So what I'm hearing is you put a lot of value in your team on them coaching folks, whether they're managers or even ICs is helping them understand that it's important to coach folks on their team and help them develop, that it's part of your job, essentially.

Bangaly Kaba (00:54:21):
That's part of your job. You are trying to build a repository of skills and repository of knowledge and of team velocity. And the only way you can do that is everyone is... So rising tide has to lift all boats.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:33):
Amazing. And interestingly, that probably teaches you how to do your job better because you're in teaching, you actually learn things a lot better.

Bangaly Kaba (00:54:40):
That's right. That's right. And it forces you to figure out how can you get things off of your plate so that you can go work on bigger things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:46):
Yeah, and how good does it feel when folks that you used to manage go on to do bigger and better things.

Bangaly Kaba (00:54:51):
That's right. That's great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:52):
I want to talk a little bit about growth within YouTube. I heard that you haven't been there for that long, and apparently you've already... Two extra, three extra more, something important within YouTube. I don't know exactly the details, and people are very impressed with the impact you've already had. And apparently a lot of the success there and other places is how you think about growth through flywheels. You always look for the flywheel that helps drive growth. Can you just talk about either at YouTube, ideally YouTube, whatever you can share, because that's pretty impressive, especially for a company that scale that you're making so much impact, or other places, just how you think about flywheels and growth.

Bangaly Kaba (00:55:29):
Well, it's very generous of you. I wouldn't say, look, we've done some really good work, some good work so far at YouTube, and it's been a journey. I do think a lot about flywheels. I think it's actually a lot of growth is really understanding what is the value profit, all of the different points of the experience, especially if you have a multi-sided marketplace. A multi-sided marketplace for YouTube is like the creator and what the creator is trying to achieve both from an engagement perspective, but also for me for a monetization perspective. And then for the viewer or the purchaser, where is their hat? What are they trying to do, and where are they missing the opportunity?

(00:56:13):
I can't really go into specifics a bunch with YouTube, but what I would say is this is that one thing that I always do when I come in is I try to push my teams to really dog food products in their adjacent user state, if you will. And what I mean by that is often, a product that you and I use that we've been using for years isn't actually the product that we're building for other people. Like a power user who's using a product has... There's so much history and there's so much informed knowledge on how that product... for that product to actually create a great experience for you that if you were to go and create a new Gmail account and look at YouTube today, I guarantee you it's a completely different and significantly worse experience.

(00:57:03):
And there's a lot of obvious opportunities missed, especially with what is the flywheel and why things are working or not working if you don't actually go and use things in a new state. And an example of this when we talk about YouTube is a lot of the YouTube graph for searching stuff is based on what have you watched in the past? So if you go and search and you search history, it's going to be about like, well, what have you watched in the past or what have you searched for, and what can we show you that's going to be what we can better predict?

(00:57:33):
But if you don't have a line of search history, then they're not going to do as good of a job. And so that's not a direct translation for what we were doing. But for me, I work on freedom monetization, and there are really important flywheels around what does it take for a creator to make content that can help them to monetize? How do we get that content to people and where to what extent are we getting that content to people, and how do we make sure that people feel good about what they're receiving, the people who are paying. And all of those flywheels have to work.

(00:58:02):
And so part of what I've been able to do is really think about how do we connect the dots in a story that the teams can uniquely understand, can help them to lean in even more and have clarity and purpose of work. Sometimes, what's super important about the flywheels actually is enabling for your teams to know what to work on and what not to work on. And then it also helps us to understand what do we know and what do we not know about creators and viewers and monetization operations so that we can do the understand work to improve the velocity and to prove the impact.

(00:58:35):
And that's really where we've been focused. And so I did a lot of this in YouTube, but I also did this in Instacart, really thinking about when I joined Instacart, one of the big questions I had was like, how will people in their daily lives... How's their daily life actually reflecting in the purchase experience? Are we making it easy for them? Because when you buy groceries, you're not going to going grocery shopping because you want beautiful ingredients in your fridge. You're going grocery shopping because you actually have a meal to put together. So are we actually reflecting the real job to be done, which is I want to buy tacos, I want to make Taco Tuesday. Can we make it easier for people to find the ingredients for tacos, as opposed to having them sort for tortillas and tomatoes and avocado? And so it's really thinking about what is the job and then what is the flywheel to make that happen, and how do we make this come to life?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:25):
There's so many things that I want to follow up on here. First of all, I realize that all of the things you worked on, I am a daily active user of or weekly active user. Twitter, YouTube, Instagram, Instacart about weekly active user, I think that might be. Yeah. Wow, nice job. You got me. You got me in the flywheels of all your flywheels.

Bangaly Kaba (00:59:45):
I was not intentional, but I'm glad my efforts had improved joy, just a little bit,

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:48):
Nice work.

Bangaly Kaba (00:59:49):
... ideally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:51):
Okay, so a couple takeaways here. One is you think about the value prop at every interaction of both sides, if it's a multi-sided marketplace or if it's just like, "Why would I be doing this?" So it's like, "Why would I send an invite to my friend? Why would I share this photo? Why would I open up Instacart?" And then you think about the jobs to be done during the day of a potential user and how can we flow into that versus not connect to their actual day-to-day experience?

Bangaly Kaba (01:00:17):
And is the product actually working? As I'm doing this, I'm looking and saying, "Is the product actually set up to deliver these things? Do we actually see it work or not?" I think there's a lot of assumptions that the product works, but a lot of times teams will surprisingly build the pieces of a flow but not actually build the experience, the output. They don't design it in a way where you're getting the real output that you need.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:39):
That's such a easy to miss point you're making here, which is you just think about, "Hey, I have Taco Tuesday. I'm actually as a product manager on Instacart. I'm going to open up the app, and use it in this use case and see how it goes."

Bangaly Kaba (01:00:51):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:52):
And most people don't do that is what you realized.

Bangaly Kaba (01:00:55):
Most people don't do that. Another example of this, this was years ago, but at Instacart, Instacart made it really hard to reorder stuff, super hard to reorder. And it was shocking to me, because when I thought about it, when I go to the grocery store, 90% of the time I'm getting the same stuff. It's like maybe not every trip, but over the course of a month or two, you've got a list of things that are part of your staple, and then occasionally holiday time I went some peppermint bark chocolate or something. There's random snacks you're going to throw in, but there's... And so when we looked at the data, it turns out, after five times when you go to Instacart, 90% of your order was the same. But when you wanted to reorder, at least back then, you couldn't go and reorder easily. You had to dig and find it like seven or eight clicks.

(01:01:46):
And when you did reorder, you had to reorder the whole thing. You couldn't take pieces, you couldn't take, I want to take the milk and the blueberries. And so you think about growth, you think about what does it mean to grow an Instacart? What does it mean to actually drive better retention? Well, it's actually really important to make it easy for people to make the next order. And so the product wasn't really built for that, though people have the best intentions in mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:10):
The adjacent order.

Bangaly Kaba (01:02:12):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:13):
I imagine that was maybe one of the biggest growth wins in Instacart history is just the reorder the same thing, because I do that all the time.

Bangaly Kaba (01:02:20):
Yeah, you would be surprised.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:22):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA, and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risk. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A dot com slash Lenny.

(01:03:14):
You mentioned this concept of adjacent user kind of adjacently, but I think it's worth spending a little more time here. It's like this term you popularized and you explained it somewhat, but maybe explain a little bit more. I think it's really powerful for people and how do you think about growth.

Bangaly Kaba (01:03:29):
This was something that came out of actually my time at Instagram. It was a framework that we came up with because Instagram really was, at that time, we grew so fast that the people who were using Instagram in February were completely different than people who were using it the following October and then the next January. I think when I joined, we were at like 440 million monthly actives. January 2016, at the end of that year we were at 636 million, grew like 47% that year. And so when we talk to users, first half of 2016, when we talk to women in the US in their 30, they're like, "Why would I have an Instagram? I have a Facebook account." Literally people said that, it was that long ago. And then a year later it's like, "Of course I use Instagram. Instagram is my everything." The world changed so fast.

(01:04:21):
And so when you're in a hypergrowth product, it's really, really important to understand who your users are today and the persona of the user, what motivates them, why they're using it, but then also to understand who is the next user? Who is the user who could be using this product, but for some reason it doesn't work for them, and understanding who that adjacent user is and when you are actually starting to see that adjacent user adopt the product. And one of the ways you start to see the adjacent users starting to adopt the product, especially with the data, is you start seeing cohort curves decline. You start seeing the people who sign up today, three or six months from now, they're signing up and they're doing a worse job. Nothing's changing the product, but just the understanding of how the product should work is different.

(01:05:12):
They might be less tech savvy. On a scale of an early adopter versus late majority, they might be closer to the late majority. And so we saw this at Instagram. We always knew working on our registration flow, and at one point we were converting at some insanely high percent, and then three months later it would go down by 15%, not because anything was broken, but just because we'd broken into new markets. You bring on people in India or you bring on people in the Philippines, and their understanding of how it works, the phones they use, et cetera are all different. So really, the core of their adjacent news was a few things. One is like you have to understand who's using your product today and why. And when you're growing at some really strong pace, 30, 40, 50% or more per year, you've got to be on top of who you believe the next user is and why.

(01:06:02):
And then you also have to be the adjacent exactly, use the product like them and see how it's working, what's broken with it. And so at an Instacart, the adjacent user, the original user might've been like an office admin who is going to buy this thing every week because of during happy hours and team staff. But then the next adjacent user might've been the mom of three or four or the dad of three or four who's home with the kids and they need to depend on Instacart, versus later on it might be they're a single person in New York who does this out of convenience. But what they're optimizing for, how they use the product all changes, and the functionality and the abilities are fundamentally different. So you have to be them, you have to watch how they use the product, you have to talk to them, and then have to visit them and literally see what they're doing in real time in order to make sure that you're enabling the right jobs for them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:57):
I love just the visualization of the adjacent user. Basically your growth is going to come from non-existing users. It's the users right outside that circle of...

Bangaly Kaba (01:07:05):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:05):
... pre-users are today, and you need to think about what do they need that existing users maybe don't need. You said that this is most powerful for hypergrowth companies. Is this something you think people like all companies should be thinking about or is it a lot less important if you're not a hypergrowth business?

Bangaly Kaba (01:07:21):
So it's a great question. I think it's essential. It's mandatory for hypergrowth. I think it's very helpful if you have a product or a company that is not growing what you want it to be. And so you are focused on capturing more share of wallet instead of expanding your audience. And so sometimes you can imagine a cosmetics company, for example, that's like digitally enabled. You can imagine that they've hit a ceiling in terms of the growth of their users, and they're really just trying to get people to buy more product, but maybe the people who want to use their product are missing something from your current product. Maybe you're missing different skin tone shades, or maybe you're missing certain types of tools. So really talking to who is just outside of your current user base, who's coming to your product and looking around and not buying and understanding what are their needs and figuring out how do you enable for them, how do you build the right experience for them in order to become adopters of your product?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:21):
So what I'm hearing is spend some understand work to figure out who your potential users are,

Bangaly Kaba (01:08:25):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:26):
... and then use the product as them and see what is missing. I imagine user research goes into this. You're not actually going to understand necessarily all the things they need. So it's probably fine folks in that cohort and see how they use the product. Awesome.

Bangaly Kaba (01:08:41):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:42):
The question I had on my mind as you're talking, you've come into so many companies and helped them with growth. Where do you find most of the opportunities often lie? Is it like onboarding, activation? Is there a trend like that you're like, "Here's probably there's going to be opportunity here," or is it super mixed bag?

Bangaly Kaba (01:08:58):
Usually it's somewhere in the onboarding to habit-building experience. What does it take for someone to actually understand the value, that first moment, that first aha moment in the product? And a lot of teams, it's shocking how many teams don't really understand what that moment is for them. And then also how do you get them to build habit around the product. Oftentimes, a lot of people equate growth to top of funnel, and that is also critical. I think having the right top of funnel motion is really critical and building on that. So I think there's one part of, it's like once you have the right top of funnel motion to get people to come in, how do you help to make sure of the defining value and the building habit and their routine? Because that's the thing that helps you to compound over time. If you're bringing a lot of people but they're not staying around, then you just have a leaky bucket and it doesn't matter how big your top funnel is. So making sure that that first-month and two-month, three-month experience is great.

(01:10:04):
And then the other part is really figuring out how do you build compounding growth loops where it's not just one way of acquiring people, but you're building two and three and four ways that layer onto each other that help you to really supercharge your engine of acquiring people. So at Instagram, if you kind of look at where Instagram is and how I [inaudible 01:10:28] and grew, there's a lot that goes into it, but if you actually unpack the top of funnel for what worked at Instagram, there's certainly a component of it, which was our core component, which was invitations, where people inviting you and making sure that those invitations work and they work well and that people, their friends are coming on, you get notified.

(01:10:48):
But another part that goes unspoken, still critical to this day was the celebrity partnerships was critical, because basically they had this wonderful partnerships team that basically took Instagram and taught celebrities how to use it, how to make it work for them, how to tell their own story and be their own brand, and that was a critical growth funnel because with that, you had the ability for them to create these celebrities and celebrity creators to set the norm for how the platform gets used, but they also were getting picked up by the news and the media for all the stuff that's happening in the celebrity world, which then added onto this other growth level, which was SEO.

(01:11:36):
And so every time a news article came out, they would link to the creators or the celebrities Instagram account or that particular post. And so you have this whole SEO engine that worked. And the SEO engine was because you have both web, which we launched at Instagram, which created the canonical SEO tables, and then you had all of these inbound links from these celebrity sites and news media, but then what you also had is you had embeds for Instagram and all of these different sites, like a news article, whatever, the posts, Lenny's podcast, Instagram account, and those embeds help with SEO juice.

(01:12:15):
And so you have not just the invites, but now you have the celebrities, now you have the SEO component. And then we would do a bunch of paid media on top of that using a lot of those signals. And then we have our own content. And so you would have all of these different growth engines compounding each other. So every time the invitations got better, every time we've got more celebrities, every time SEO gets better, it's like magnifying the top of funnel, and at the bottom of the funnel or mid-funnel, making sure that people are retaining and getting value and staying around over the long term.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:47):
That is so interesting. I had no idea this was such a core part of the early growth strategy. Everyone's always talking about reality and word of mouth, all these things. And you're saying partnerships was a key part of the early growth strategy.

Bangaly Kaba (01:12:59):
Huge. It's huge.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:59):
That's so funny. Never something people talk about in growth, this partnership. It's always is like, "Oh, there's a couple of companies that really had success from partnerships in BD." How early was this a big part of the strategy? How early in the history of,

Bangaly Kaba (01:13:13):
I mean the partnerships team was there before I joined. It was a very savvy and astute thing that Kevin and Mikey set up. The partnerships team drove a lot of the word of mouth around Instagram, but it was the partnership's work in combination with the product work that actually helped to allow a lot of that to land. It was our ability to think outside the box and understand that we needed to have a web presence because it was critical for international growth and it also helped with SEO. And so the idea of launching web really drove and actually increased Instagram's growth by 10% the minute we launched it. And it was something that George Wang, who was there before me, had the idea around. It wasn't really something that Kevin and Mikey believed in initially, but we had to prove to them that it was really impactful and one should launch.

(01:14:03):
Then they understood why it was impactful and all of the effect of it. But web was really critical for driving so much SEO, which helped support a lot of the celebrity work and the partnerships work, because now every time creator or celebrity did something on Instagram, every news media article picked it up and it just helped to drive searches in Google searches, which helped to make Instagram part of the cultural zeitgeist.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:29):
This is so interesting, because everyone imagines Instagram, virality, word of mouth, like SEO and partnerships sounds like a core part of Instagram's early growth, which I don't think anyone ever talks about.

Bangaly Kaba (01:14:39):
No, that's huge.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:39):
Wow.

Bangaly Kaba (01:14:40):
I mean it was part of Facebook's growth too, but I think a little bit differently. It's not as much partnership, but when you Google someone now, you Google someone's name, oftentimes, Instagram is one of the first five things that comes up for the average person,

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:40):
Yeah, right.

Bangaly Kaba (01:14:40):
... now, by design.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:53):
LinkedIn, Instagram, Twitter.

Bangaly Kaba (01:14:54):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:55):
Do you ever see the video of Alex Jiu talking about TikTok's growth strategy of this whole... He had this metaphor, and he was trying to grow off of Instagram, so his metaphor was Instagram is like you're in Europe and you're killing it. If you're in Europe and you're king, you don't ever want to go to America. There's no reason for you to give it up. And America is TikTok in this case. He's like, "How do we convince people to come to America and try moving everything there?" He's like, "We need to go after the people that are not doing well in Europe, who want to be the king, and we're going to help you become that king in America, or the President."

Bangaly Kaba (01:15:28):
So he used the adjacent... Used that theory on us, basically, is what you're saying.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:33):
That's right. He did. Drink up your shake.

Bangaly Kaba (01:15:40):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:40):
Yeah. And I think the reason that strategy worked differently is there was already a place, so they couldn't execute what you did because there's already celebrities already there, and it's not like, "Come here." There's no point. I already have a huge following.

Bangaly Kaba (01:15:51):
So you make your own celebrities.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:53):
Make your own celebrities. Exactly. And they went after the B-list, C-list people. So it's interesting that people look at Instagram, like, cool, we're going to do partnerships, SEO. But I think it's important to realize things change when the market is a different dynamic. You can't just do the same thing.

Bangaly Kaba (01:15:53):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:07):
It won't work as well. Is there anything else from the Instagram early days that maybe people wouldn't know or would be interesting to share? Because you were there quite early, and now it's maybe the most thriving social network in the world.

Bangaly Kaba (01:16:17):
One thing that's actually, I think, interesting, as an interesting story that doesn't get talked about a lot is I think the early Instagram was built where... it was built in a way where every follow was created equal. And what I mean by that is if I followed you, Lenny, or if I followed Kim Kardashian, I followed Selena Gomez, all follows were treated like they were equally important. And this is actually a really important fact. It was a really important factor for a couple of reasons. One, early celebrities who were adopting Instagram obviously benefited from that, because a celebrity is going to get a follow before an average person does. It doesn't mean that their followers weren't meaningful. It's just that when you have a machine learning that's just optimized for a click through a follow, then that matters.

(01:17:15):
But what ended up happening is we ended up looking at the data, and I can't take credit for this. My colleague at the time, Rob Andrews, had identified this. He was the head of growth marketing. He was a peer of mine that basically, this is 2016-ish days, the average person would come on Instagram and retain, but then leave after 7, 8, 9 months. We'd see a flattening in a retention curve, but then we would see it dip again, which was very weird. And we're like, why is this happening? And it turned out that what was happening anecdotally is that people were revving up Instagram, following a bunch of people, following a lot of celebrities, actually, because the celebrities were being shown, and then when they actually went to make their first post, a few months later-

Bangaly Kaba (01:18:00):
... being shown. And then when they actually went to make their first post a few months later, none of their friends were following them. And so there was posting into an echo chamber and anecdotally people would stop using the product because they felt bad. We hypothesized that no one was liking or following or commenting on their posts. And so we had to do this thing. We called it the connections pivot, right in like 2016 ... Actually, 2017, where we had to convince Kevin and Mikey that it was actually not the right thing to do to prioritize celebrities to everybody because we were basically biting bite your nose to spank your face, whatever that is, because the regular person wasn't having a great experience.

(01:18:44):
And so it doesn't mean that we shouldn't recommend celebrities, but Jeff recommended celebrities to people who are already on there. They already have their graph. And the most important thing to do is actually get regular human-to-human connections in the first whatever, when people first sign up so that when you let me actually go make your first post, your friends would see it and you would be validated and you would feel like, okay, this is a police for me. I have a community here.

(01:19:11):
And so that connection pivot was critical. It changed ... Literally, angle-changed the retention on Instagram. And so if you about Instagram's growth, there was a TechCrunch article about Instagram's growth at I think 2017, 2018 when we were going 40, 50% year over year. And obviously, there was a lot that went into that skyrocket. People think that stories was the sole reason why we grew and story brought us a lot of people, but we literally, our attention doubled over the course of a year and a half. If you could imagine, imagine if your bank account, the interest rate doubles every month, you know what I mean? It was incredible. This shift in making sure that people got connected with their friends early on changed the way that people perceive the value. And so a lot of the top-of-funnel work that we did, a lot of the activation work that we did really paid off in spades ultimately.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:05):
Wow. I'm curious, what's the most impactful thing you've shipped/led to in terms of impact and experiment launch?

Bangaly Kaba (01:20:14):
At Instagram, we saw this big problem where people were logging out and not being able to get back into their account. It was crazy. Hundreds of thousands of people a day could not get back into their account. It was because ... And when I say could not get back into the account, I mean they literally would try and 28 days later, we would never see them again. And we thought it was a problem because they didn't remember where their email was, which email they signed up with or what their actual handle was or what their password was. We were losing 10, 12 million people a year from what we called account access churn. So we worked on this problem and we had spent a lot of time in South Asia and Southeast Asia trying to understand how to grow the product. And from that time we realized that it's important actually for people to be able to log out.

(01:21:14):
We don't want to restrict people's ability to log out because there are many people in the world who don't want to use background data because they're on prepaid phone plans or they don't have a lot of money and they want to share their phone with a sibling and so they log out. And so it's really important. And so we don't want to take away that behavior, but we did have to do a better job of helping them get back in.

(01:21:40):
So we did two things. One was there used to be a time, and you can probably find it on Google if you did an archive search where if you wanted to log into your Instagram account, there would be a tab for your email and then there would be a tab for your handle. And we didn't really make it easy for you to log in with your phone number either. You had to get to the right tab and the right place to get the right thing. And so we did this omnibox experience where it was just like email, phone handle, put it all in one place and we made it super simple for you. And the second time, if you tried it twice and it didn't work, if we knew that you were on a trusted device, we would just send you a text message and say, Hey, are you trying to log in? That solved half the problem.

(01:22:23):
And then the other half, what we did, and this still exists today on Instagram. When you log out we say, Hey Lenny, it looks like you're going to log out, do you want us to save your credentials on your advice so you don't have to worry about your password? And then we later added an ability to have a password. And that's all basically the other half.

(01:22:40):
And so just being really thoughtful around what is actually the core job that people are trying to do because a bad experience would've been like, Hey, let's make it really hard for people to walk out. And then how do we ... One or two experiments really help people to get back into the experience. And so what was interesting was that we were able to solve this ... And this actually helped drive public 15, 20 million extra month active users a year, but what was also super interesting was that it helped us to realize that getting people back into their account more drove more account content creation on incident in ways that we didn't expect. And so because we were getting people back into the account, people getting into the second account and getting into the third account and they were going into their finsta account and creating content more. And so that actually led to the creation of a multiple accounts team, which is what has made it easy for you to navigate between accounts on Instagram today.

(01:23:42):
And so that was understandable actually coming to life. It was, Hey, we're going to do the understand work to figure out how to solve account access issues and we're going to solve it. And solving it, when we looked at the data, we're like, Hey, why is all this account, why is all this content creation happening? That was not what we were expecting and where is it happening? And it was happening from second and third accounts. And so that made us realize that oh, people were not only getting locked out of their first accounts, but they were actually creating a lot on the second and third accounts. How can we make it easy for them to get and navigate between their first account, whether it's your account and a business account or your account and [inaudible 01:24:19] account or a bakery account, you know what I mean? And so that created a multiple accounts team, which I ended up owning and that ended up even becoming a bigger effort after I left.

(01:24:26):
So that's an example of understand work, solve a real problem, real-solve and solving massive solution, massive impact, creating new data that you didn't expect that drives new understand work, which creates a whole new team to allow you to move around your Instagram account more seamlessly. And you can see this now when you go to post, you can decide, okay, I want to post as Lenny, I want to post as this other thing, or when I want to write a story, you can change anywhere. And that was all an effort that originally came out of this realization.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:55):
I love how many of these huge impact stories are just such straightforward, simple things like just let people log in more easily, help them log out more effectively, fine, show them their friends versus celebrities. So many of these stories are often just really simple ideas that lead to such profound change. The log-out example is interesting. At Airbnb, we found the log-out was actually causing a lot of churn also, but they went ... Initially, they went with a simple solution of just extend the session, log-out link instead of a week, make it two weeks or three weeks or four weeks. You pointed out with Instagram, people actually wanted to log out. They're like, let's leave that alone. Start with making it easier to log back in.

Bangaly Kaba (01:25:35):
That's right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:36):
Amazing. Man, you're so full of amazing stories. I'm curious with Facebook, maybe just as I wrap up here, is there anything there? Because you were an early growth PM at Facebook. You worked a lot on friends and helping people discover their friends. Is there anything in there that would be interesting to share?

Bangaly Kaba (01:25:51):
In my time, so I joined Instagram or Facebook in 2014 and I was responsible for people recommendations globally. And at the time, Facebook was at scale and big and dominated North America. And so really the focus area at the time was South Asia and Southeast Asia. And we noticed a lot of really interesting things, especially in India. Facebook seemed to be broken from a people graph perspective. The data was telling us people didn't have as many friends in common. In the US, it might've been on just making up a number. On average, we saw 22 friends in common when you make a friendship connection. But in India, it was like seven, right? And then there was a lot of friending and messaging or friending and unfriending. We're like, what's going on here? So we had some hypotheses from the data, we ran a bunch of tests. Nothing seemed to work and be a breakthrough.

(01:26:44):
So actually, at that time, I had to propose and they agreed to do this. We needed to do understand work. So we were literally on the ground in India every three months took a team of engineers with me. I'm talking like we're in Delhi in people's homes and Mumbai, and we went to go investigate what was going on, watch people make friends, watch them use people you may know and really understand what was happening and see what was going on because we felt like there was context that we were missing.

(01:27:14):
There was a lot of things that we learned. It was mind-blowing. But one of the most interesting things, Lenny, was that we watched people try to make friends and we said, "Hey wait, that's their profile page. Why aren't you looking at it?" And they would say, "Well, that doesn't have any relevant information for me, so I need to go look in the pictures." They're like, "Well, why doesn't the profile page have relevant information for you? That's where the information's supposed to be." And they're like, "Listen, this guy's named Amit Kumar. I have 10 friends named Amit Kumar. What is this page going to tell me?" And they would scroll down, they'd be like, "All of these fields are not relevant to me." And so you look at it, Facebook at the time, it was very Western-centric. It's probably still is, it was like name, it was like school you went to, job title, affiliations, that kind of stuff. That's all Western paradigms. Some of these people are like, my friends sell jeans at a market. None of this is relevant. You don't even know the name of the school. Sometimes it might be a number or something. And so all of the descriptors that we take for granted were not relevant and the names were very common.

(01:28:24):
This was really illuminating. So what they would do is go look at pictures and say, is this my friend's car or is this my friend's ... Can I see my friend's animal and what's available? And it was interesting because the understand work, at least the more realization. So we went back to Menlo Park with the data, turned out ... We said, okay, let's look at the data in a different way. What are the most common names on Facebook? And we looked at, and the top 10 common names are Indian names. And the most common name was Amit Kumar. And there was like 250,000 people a month who used Amit Kumar who were real people. So imagine you're in Bangalore and you're trying to find your buddy named Amit Kumar. It's probably 5,000 that we could possibly recommend. So super interesting was like the cultural context was so different. So we had to get creative, find creative ways to figure out how to solve it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:12):
The power of understand work shines again. We have a recurring segment on this podcast called Fail Corner where ask guests to share a time they failed in their career and what they learned from that experience because a lot of people look at your career and your story and just like, holy shit, what a journey. I will never be able to achieve this. Is there a time when things didn't go well and something that you took away from that experience?

Bangaly Kaba (01:29:36):
Probably for me, I think my time at Instacart was probably not my best time. I think I went to Instacart with a vision of what I felt the product could be or should be. And it was I think a big story that I deeply believed, but I was not, I think aware or in tune with what the DNA of the company was at the time, which was it was like a company that was really great at operations because that was the core of what they did. And they were really building out a lot of their product experience and a lot of what the new function. And so I think what they needed at the time was a much more tactical in the weeds, get your hands dirty, do, do, do because they hadn't really seen that before. And what I wanted to deliver in that experience was more building the right systems, the right people, the right processes so that we can figure out how to institutionalize the work.

(01:30:46):
And I think for me that was probably my biggest oversight is that I think they needed more tactical and I was more ... I don't want to say in the clouds, but more thinking about where do we want to go with the experience that we need to build versus let me get deep in the funnel data. It felt like it became loggerheads where I didn't feel like I was probably either delivering what they wanted or being supported in the way that I wanted to be supported.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:13):
Is the lesson there to spend more time and understand work before you take a job to make sure you're aligned with what they're looking for?

Bangaly Kaba (01:31:20):
That is actually the lesson. And I think it's part of that is it's doing that. One of my takeaways is do that not only with the people there but with the people who've left it to, but the people who've left the company will give you a perspective that is raw and different and much more I think aligned with what you want to hear. And it may or may not be the same, but I think the people ... This isn't specific to Instacart. Whenever you talk to people who are at the company, they're always try to tell you the best version of the company. The people who left will tell you what the worst version or their version and it's on you to triangulate that information, but you need both sides.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:57):
Love that lesson. Bangaly, is there anything else that you want to share or leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Bangaly Kaba (01:32:06):
No, I think we've got a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:07):
We have. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Bangaly Kaba (01:32:14):
I am ready to go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:15):
First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Bangaly Kaba (01:32:20):
Few I've recommended most of them are Over My Shoulder, actually Range by David Epstein. I think are really critical PM work really being able to be a master of a lot of different things or somewhat deep in a lot of different things. Deep Work, Cal Newport, kind of clearing space to be focused and do the things thinking about the most important work in a deep and undisturbed way. And then Start At The End by Matt Waller, who's a behavioral scientist buddy of mine. Really thoughtful book, helps you really think about what you're building, but in a way that's more holistic.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:49):
Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates when you're interviewing them?

Bangaly Kaba (01:32:55):
I've got a relatively new one that I love. This works exceptionally well I believe for more senior hires, whether they're like group product managers, directors, or even kind of senior ICs. I go through and I think about what are the four, usually five skills that are really critical for someone to have in this job. And I think about them myself and I think about the archetypes of what is the ratio I want of these? But then I ask them, I say, Hey, take out a piece of paper or take out your laptop. I'm going to give you five skills and I want you to stack-rank them for me. One to five. So one being the one you're strongest at and five being the one you're relatively weakest at.

(01:33:41):
So it's way better than saying give me your strengths and weaknesses. It also forces them to contextualize it against the skills that you're looking for, but it also helps you have a meaningful conversation around how they think about themselves and their self-awareness and to what extent they're ranking these skills based on the context they're in versus their own ability.

(01:34:02):
Sometimes you rank something a five because something you would just weak at because you haven't had to do because there's a strong function at that company. And so when they stack-rank it and then people are like ... I've asked this probably four or five times on a recent role. I hire people like, Ooh, this is really hard. But really good question. I usually will dig into what is number two and what's number four and number five, and why? And it really helps me to one, calibrate am I looking for the right person? And two, are their skills actually a match for what we need at this time?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:33):
I love when I hear a question I've never heard before. That is genius. Next question, do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Bangaly Kaba (01:34:41):
I think one that I enjoy quite a lot ... Actually, it's really kind of ... It's really simple, but amazing is this app called Flighty. You heard of it? F-L-I-G-H-T-Y.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:52):
No.

Bangaly Kaba (01:34:52):
It is a travel app and it manages all of your flight itineraries and your friends' itineraries. But the reason why I love it is it goes two or three clicks deeper than the average travel app or your airline app and it tells you when your inbound plane is running late, it helps you to understand where the gates on. My wife was just in Madrid last week. And she texted me saying, "Hey, I'm at the airport but no gate is announced." I looked at Flighty, I'm like, "Your gate is E67. It's actually been assigned but it hasn't been announced." And this happens a lot in Europe. You'll be there and they won't tell you the gate until an hour beforehand.

(01:35:28):
So it gives you so much information right before. It's actually publicly announced, which is really helpful, especially if you really need to be somewhere because oftentimes I know if my plane's going to be late and if I need to rebook before anyone else does, which helps you, gives you a better chance of getting somewhere. Or I will be able to get to a gate, I get to SFO and it might not be on the board at SFO, but I know exactly where it gave you this. So really a great app. Can't say enough about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:53):
I'm downloading it right now. It's got a bazillion reviews, five stars. Thank you for the recommendation. Incredibly useful.

Bangaly Kaba (01:36:00):
Of course.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:01):
I'm trying out a new question. You've joined a bunch of different companies. What's one thing that you've done in the first 90 days at the job that has made a big impact?

Bangaly Kaba (01:36:11):
I go and I sit in team meetings and see how they operate. I just listen. I talk to not only the PMs but the content designer and everyone, and I try to get to know them by both name and story. And what I mean by that, it's like oftentimes people, execs come in and they're like, what are we doing? What are we prioritizing? Why does it matter? And they don't really take the time to actually learn who the people are, what the story is, what they care about, what they're passionate about, both professionally and personally and really try to understand how the team is working from that person's perspective.

(01:36:52):
And what I find is actually when I do that, people are way more willing to hear ... When it is time for me to share my thoughts, they're way more invested because they believe I'm invested in that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:05):
I love that. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you really like and find useful and often share with friends or family in work or in life?

Bangaly Kaba (01:37:17):
I'm not big on mottos. There's one that I've actually been repeating. I don't remember. I got it done ... It might have been like Adam Grant or someone on Instagram, but it was ... It's one, I said it to a colleague of mine, he's like, "Wow, that really hit differently." I think it goes something like this. People and teams don't really reach ... They don't actually reach their goals. They fall to the level of their systems.

(01:37:43):
And that to me was really powerful because I struggle a lot with just being balanced in life, working out the way I want to and getting the right rest and making sure that I'm spending time in all the right places. And that's really like ... It's a goal of mine. But the problem is that I don't ... My system for that specifically, I tend to ... I'm not rigorous with it is when I need to be.

(01:38:06):
But on the other hand, at work, I'm very rigorous in the systems and processes. So really that saying to me really hits because it is both applicable to your life and how you want to live your life but also how you want to run your teams.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:19):
Final question. You mentioned that you were a dean at a school, a boarding school. Is there something that you take away from that experience that's going to sticks with you? I know you mentioned one thing about treat PM's skills are similar to teacher skills. There anything else there?

Bangaly Kaba (01:38:34):
Actually, so I was a dean of a boarding school in Switzerland, which was actually one of the most fun and interesting times of my life. It was an American school in Switzerland just outside of Lugano, Switzerland, the Italian-speaking section. I learned a lot about myself during the time. I learned a lot about just relationships and people. I actually had a call with one of my old students this morning. She's like in her thirties now. This was like 20 years ago. So I still keep in touch with them. And I think that's the comment I made about knowing people by name and story matters a lot. It says a lot that 20 years later I'm still talking to some of these students who are their own adults running their own businesses. But also I think the human challenges and human connection, human problems, very universal.

(01:39:24):
This was a really interesting place when you had kids coming from a variety of different walks of life, some who lived in Azerbaijan or Kosovo and felt like ... The families felt like they couldn't be safe there, so they wanted to send the kids somewhere else. So some kids whose parents worked at the US Embassy and just were kind of there for a little bit of time. And what I found to be true is that just spending time with people and understanding their own story and family life really led to a lot of shared interests and passions. And it helped really me to see that the world can be very similar in so many ways and it is very much reflected to me in my day-to-day life in tech because as you know in the Bay Area, there's so many people who come from so many walks of life who end up in this journey building these products and companies and just help me to value so many different voices.

(01:40:15):
If you want to build world-class products, if you want to build product that can scale around the world, if you want to build product that's be hypergrowth, you have to be inclusive of so many voices. And so you have to build that skill to be able to acknowledge and learn from and to live in tension with different voices.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:32):
That is beautiful. I love that we're ending there. Bangaly, I feel like we've done a lot of understand work and I think we've helped a lot of people with a lot of things we talked about so much. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to follow what you're up to, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Bangaly Kaba (01:40:47):
For as much as I've worked at social companies, I actually don't use my social products that much. I'm on Instagram. If you look @iambangaly, I-A-M-B-A-N-G-A-L-Y, Google that. All of my socials handles all have the same kind of link including LinkedIn. So hit me up whenever. And then what can people do useful for me? I don't know. I don't have a short list. I would say I love to hear people's stories. I love to give advice. Obviously, my time is a little bit limited occasionally, but I think if people can share with me things that they're learning or things that they see in the market, or if they have questions, I always love to hear it. And so I think for me, just hearing other people's stories and learning what other people are doing is probably the most rewarding for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:35):
Bangaly, thank you so much for being here.

Bangaly Kaba (01:41:38):
Thank you. This is amazing. I really appreciate you, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:40):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app.

(01:41:49):
Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast. com. See you in the next episode.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:00:00):
I think when you're running a marketplace, you tend to sit in your ivory tower a little bit, looking at stats and thinking like, "If only we could get people to do X, it'd be better for everyone." I certainly did that in my career. I think that's missing the point that we're humans, and I think sometimes we act in ways that are non-deterministic or counterintuitive. But my take is I'm a huge believer in market forces and empowerment, so provide guardrails for what a good experience is in your marketplace, set a clear bar for quality, and provide the right coaching and tools for supply to be successful, and then take a step back and see where the gaps are and invest more in hands-on tactics just to close those gaps more specifically.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:47):
Today my guest is Ben Lauzier. Ben was VP of product and growth at Thumbtack, where he rebuilt the product team and Thumbtack's growth strategy, re-architected the revenue model, and helped 3X Thumbtack's growth within three years. Prior to Thumbtack, Ben was at Lyft for over six years, where he was employee number 30 and led product and growth for the driver's side of the business, and at one point reached 1% of U.S. workers driving for Lyft every month. He currently spends his time advising marketplace teams and founders, teaching a reforged course on marketplace growth, and most recently started a healthcare company called Nurra that connects you to a care advocate to help you navigate the healthcare system in the U.S. In our conversation, we go many layers deep on the many key elements of building and scaling a marketplace business, including what to focus on pre-product market fit, how to know which side of the marketplace to prioritize, what product market fit looks like, how to track liquidity, what causes most marketplaces to fail and how to avoid that.

(00:01:43):
And a bunch of examples of really clever growth strategies, especially on the supply side, and some really interesting stories about how Lyft was able to compete with Uber early on with one-tenth of the resources. As a bonus, Ben also shares insights into how the European product market is different from the U.S. product market, and what he encourages European companies to change in order to operate more effectively and be more innovative. This episode is for anyone building or thinking about building a marketplace business. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube, it's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Ben Lauzier. 

(00:02:26):
Ben, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:02:29):
Thank you so much, so good to be here. Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:32):
It's absolutely my pleasure. Okay, so you are one of the most knowledgeable and experienced product leaders in the world on building and scaling a marketplace company, and so I want to spend the bulk of our time talking about and essentially extracting as much wisdom out of your brain on how to build and scale a marketplace business so that founders and teams that are struggling with building their marketplace company, or just thinking about building a marketplace business, can save a lot of time and a lot of pain. How does that sound to you?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:03:03):
That sounds amazing. That's a high bar, but I will try to live up to your expectations.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:08):
I'm confident we will hit that bar. Let me start with just setting a little context, and for folks that aren't super familiar with what is a marketplace business, they hear this term marketplace company, what's the simplest way to understand what makes a company a marketplace company and a marketplace business?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:03:24):
I mean, like you mentioned, I love marketplaces. I think I've been building and scaling marketplaces for I think almost 15 years now, and I feel like they add just such a fascinating dimension to the challenge that we work on as PMs, and it's this hidden dimension that you uncover when you work on marketplaces. And I think on paper what makes a marketplace is pretty straightforward, it's two or more sides that are distinct from one another, and they provide value to each other, and then you have an intermediary trying to facilitate that exchange of value in the middle. So, that's pretty simple explanation. I think in practice it's always a little bit more nuanced on the fringes. You have all those interesting dimensions, like how involved is the intermediary defines how managed the marketplace is. So, something like Craigslist is super hands-off, unmanaged, and something like Lyft starts to be more into the semi-managed where the platform significantly shapes the transaction in this exchange of value. So, I think that's how I see it, but there's all those fascinating variations of marketplaces, I guess.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:25):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing and feature management platform built by alums of Airbnb and Snowflake for modern growth teams. Companies like Twitch, Miro, ClickUp and DraftKings rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Experimentation is increasingly essential for driving growth, and for understanding the performance of new features. And Eppo helps you increase experimentation velocity while unlocking rigorous deep analysis in a way that no other commercial tool does. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most was our experimentation platform, where I could set up experiments easily, troubleshoot issues, and analyze performance all on my own. Eppo does all that and more, with advanced statistical methods that can help you shave weeks off experiment time, an accessible UI for diving deeper into performance, and out-of-the-box reporting that helps you avoid annoying prolonged analytic cycles. 

(00:05:18):
Eppo also makes it easy for you to share experiment insights with your team, sparking new ideas for the A/B testing flywheel. Eppo powers experimentation across every use case, including product, growth, machine learning, monetization, and email marketing. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com/lenny and 10X your experiment velocity. That's get E-P-P-O dot com slash Lenny. This episode is brought to you by Paragon, the developer platform for building native customer-facing integrations with third-party apps. Our native integrations on your product roadmap, whether it's to ingest context from your users' external data and documents, or to sync data and automate tasks across your users' other apps, integrations are mission-critical for B2B software products today. 

(00:06:06):
But building these integrations in-house cost an average of three months of engineering, according to the 2024 State of Integration survey, which results in difficult roadmap tradeoffs. This is why engineering teams at Copy.ai, AI21, and over 100 other B2B SaaS companies use Paragon so they can focus their efforts on core product features, not integrations. The result? They've shipped integrations seven times faster, all while avoiding the never-ending maintenance that comes with rolling your own integrations. Visit useparagon.com/lenny to see how Paragon can help you accelerate your product's integration roadmap today, and get $1,000 in credit on their pro and enterprise plans. That's use P-A-R-A-G-O-N dot com.

(00:06:52):
You've mentioned managed marketplaces and just how that becomes something marketplaces start to think about more, I want to get back to that because a really important point. But just to even clarify this point, a key part of a marketplace is that the company doesn't own the supply. That's in a sense what defines their marketplace versus they're just selling stuff.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:07:12):
Totally. Yes, yes. And I think again, you have companies that claim to be managed marketplaces, I think depending on how you want to look, with investors perhaps, you'll pick one angle or the other, but that's where you get into gray waters. But yeah, the marketplace implies this concept of two independent and supposedly autonomous parties that you help connect and provide this exchange of value for them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:40):
Awesome. Okay, so let's come back to that, because that's a really important topic and it's something that every marketplace trends towards or thinks about is just like we're going to control the supply, we're going to manage it, we're going to maybe own it in the future, but let's get back to that. So, you work with a ton of marketplaces, you've built a bunch of marketplaces. What do you find is the biggest struggle to building a successful marketplace business? The most common problem people run into.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:08:05):
I think there's two types of challenges, I guess there's when you're talking about creating a marketplace, and then there's when you're talking about scaling a marketplace. For creating a marketplace, I see many founders that are pre-product market fit, super eager to nerd out on marketplace dynamics. They're super excited to launch a marketplace, we all are, and they want to talk about supply and demand, they want to look at all kinds of ratios. They show me economic papers and ask, "How could we apply this principle to my company?" And here, my advice is generally always, "If you don't have product market fit, and if you don't have a good enough growth strategy for at least one side of your marketplace, just forget about all this marketplace stuff."

(00:08:46):
Focus on this core exchange of value, go deep with one side of the marketplace and see if you can rely on some crutch, some hack for the other side for time being. And you see companies like Airbnb and Thumbtack doing this with Craigslist pretty early on to jumpstart their growth as just countless examples, but don't get distracted by this shiny and cool intellectually challenging idea of working on the marketplace, and nail the basics of your product market fit at first.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:13):
So, just to spend a little more time there to make this even more real. So, you're saying that pre-product market fit, before you find that anyone really wants what you're building, focus on figuring out a way to grow one side of the marketplace. So, maybe just two quick follow up questions. How do you know which side to focus on initially? And can you give an example, I think Thumbtack may be a good example of this, of how they did that?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:09:38):
Which side to focus on is there's different approaches to this, but generally people will pick the hardest side. And so, I'll take the example of Thumbtack, because we're going to talk about it. So, Thumbtack is a home services marketplace to help you find plumbers, electricians, and the harder side there was demand. There's supply, and you can look for, you can open the yellow pages, you can find plumbers somewhere, but the hardest question was can we go out there and can we find people who want to do something in their house, who have projects that need to be done? What is the core growth strategy for us to acquire those people, to find them? And what kind of retention can we create? Can we create a delightful experience for them to come back to our platform and want us to take care of their home for them?

(00:10:32):
Pick the hardest side is my advice. And then, how some companies do this, again, I think there's a lot of different ways to do this, but a common advice is find a way to jumpstart one side. Find a way to hack one side, play one player mode is what it's also called sometimes, but try to find a way to tap into existing channels that have one side of your marketplace already latent. And so again, you have countless businesses that if you've been built off of Craigslist, I think Thumbtack was partially one of them, and the idea was like, "Hey, we can find all those great pros on Thumbtack. When we have someone who wants a job, 'Oh, you want your kitchen remodeled?' We can, behind the scenes, go and post a job on Craigslist and then we'll bring on all the contractors who are browsing Craigslist looking for jobs, we'll bring them to our platform." 

(00:11:26):
That's an example of how that you worry about the core value proposition of can we get people to come back to the platform? Can we create this delightful exchange of value? Are people trusting us? Do we have the right checks in place to make sure that you are hiring the right person? What will make you come back? And once that's done, then you can focus around how do I build a flywheel on the supply side, and how do I manage and how do I make sure I have enough plumbers per market, or something like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:53):
When you say find the hard side, how do you find that? Any advice you can give founders and teams?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:11:58):
In general, I would say intuitively the teams know, especially the teams are in the weeds, they know. They know, "Well, yeah, we can get X. But what we really struggle with is getting students to look at this." That's your sign. And I think sometimes it takes someone else to make you think about it, to reflect like, "Actually, yes, you're right. This side is obvious. We know how to get it, we just don't have the right supply for it and we don't know where to find the supply." Boom, that's the side that you should be focused on. Then you find a way to add source to demand, subsidize it, find some other way, and focus on this side that you have no idea how to grow. You should have a reliable growth strategy for the side.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:39):
In my experience, it's almost always the supply side is what you need to work on, because once you have awesome supply, people are going to be really excited to tap it. Like Uber drivers, Airbnb homes, professionals on Thumbtack. Is that your experience too?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:12:54):
Yes. I would say supply is the hardest side maybe like 80% to 90% of the time. Yeah, I totally agree. I was trying to think of counter examples, but I can't think of one. I just know that there are.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:05):
There's one I know, which is Rover, based on research I did, because it turned out it was really easy to find people who want to walk dogs and watch dogs for 50 bucks an hour or whatever. It was a very easy value prop, and so they had a waitlist, they had just so many people. Also, TaskRabbit is the one I know about where they had so many people wanting to be taskers, whatever they call them-

Benjamin Lauzier (00:13:24):
I was going to mention TaskRabbit as well. I heard of that as well, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:27):
Okay. And then you talked about there's a core part of figuring out how to grow that part, how to grow the hard part, generally the supply side. You shared a couple examples. Are there any more clever things you recall that you might be able to share of just ways people grew supply early on that could inspire people that are trying to figure this out right now?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:13:46):
Yeah, I think there's a couple of common tactics I would say pretty early on that I think companies rely on. So, we've talked about jump-starting one side of the marketplace with, it may be with Thumbtack and Lyft, also leverage job boards. You have also a lot of companies building value added services pretty early on as a core way of retaining supply pretty early on. Like let's build a really compelling basket of value for this supply, and this is going to be the thing that appeals everyone. So, OpenTable did this really well with all the restaurant services, other things that I've seen people use really well early on or converting your supply into demand or demand into supply pretty early on, so Lyft, we tried that. It actually didn't work at Lyft, but I know other marketplaces have been pretty successful with that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:44):
Just to make sure people understand that one, it's a really interesting one is, in the Lyft example would be convincing drivers to become riders, convincing riders to become drivers, and mostly the latter, convincing riders to become drivers.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:14:55):
Yeah, exactly. In our case at Lyft early on, we had a waitlist on the demand side because we just couldn't onboard enough supply. And so, we had this idea of having a pop-up. Instead of saying no drivers available, it would be like, "Hey, sorry, all the drivers are taken. People are making 50 bucks an hour right now, do you want to hop on your car and drive?" And we had some conversions, but it felt a little distracting to the overall experience and it wasn't a huge driver of supply. But I know that for Uber it actually was. I think they had a relatively meaningful amount of supply coming from [inaudible 00:15:27]

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:27):
Wow, how does that make you feel that Uber figured out a better way to approach this and made it work? That doesn't feel-

Benjamin Lauzier (00:15:33):
And it's a different audience. You would think that the Lyft passenger and driver is more likely to flip back and forth between the two. I don't know, I don't know. [inaudible 00:15:47]

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:46):
Yeah, a PM at Uber outdid you guys. Oh, no. 

Benjamin Lauzier (00:15:50):
Yes, on a couple of other things. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:52):
Interesting. 

Benjamin Lauzier (00:15:52):
And we outdid them on a few other things [inaudible 00:15:55]

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:54):
Okay, okay. That's right. So, essentially what we've been spending some time on here is just when you're starting a marketplace, figure out which side you need to drive, because that's what will unlock this opportunity. There's a hard thing that nobody's ever done before, and most of the time it's build a bunch of supply that nobody has done before, and there's all these tactics to do that. And all of this is, as you coming back to the main question I asked, we've gone on this awesome tangent, is pre-product market fit before you even know this is a thing. Spend time most of the time building supply to see if demand, customers actually want this thing. Right?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:16:34):
Exactly. And then I think there's a different set of challenges. The other pitfall that I see is, so pre-product market fit, people tend to be distracted by those marketplace dynamics like we talked about instead of doing what we just talked about. For companies that have some sort of scale and product market fit, to me the place where I see people getting tripped up most often is the concept of marketplace liquidity or how to match the health of a marketplace. To me, liquidity is how marketplaces win. It's this measure of your ability to match buyers and sellers efficiently, it's how quickly and efficiently people can find what they're looking for on your platform. So, you can picture a Venn diagram. One circle is this is what supply wants to sell, and another circle is this is what demand wants to buy, and your liquidity is the overlap between those two circles.

(00:17:26):
So for, let's take the example of Lyft or Uber, because we talked about them. It might be for all the people who open the app with the intention to book a ride, how many of those actually turn into a ride? And this metric liquidity, it's a direct multiplier on the efficiency of your marketplace. It's literally at the center of your vision, it's why you exist as a marketplace is to connect the two. And it's also the ultimate engagement loop. The more supply you have, the more choice people have, the better the services, the more likely it is that it turns into a transaction and the more likely it is that they come back. And so, it's really this incredible circle. And what I see is people missing how critical this component is in the marketplace, struggle to define it for the business, and most importantly struggle to build an actionable playbook against it. Like, "Okay, how do I manage this? Okay, it's important, but what do I do about it?" Basically.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:21):
Is there a metric you recommend people specifically look at to understand liquidity?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:18:26):
I think the metric that I like the most is a predictor of liquidity. So your liquidity might be, it's typically a measure of demand utilization. It might be looking for something on there, maybe how many of those searches with intent actually turn into a transaction. So, it's your field rate of your intentful demand typically, and that's really indicative of the net output of your marketplace. And so, that gives you a sense of the health of your marketplace, but it can be influenced by a whole bunch of different factors. So, if you think about for Thumbtack, it can be influenced by if there's a snowstorm out there, if the competition is bidding, there's a whole bunch of exogenous factors that come into play. And the metric that I think is slightly more actionable is a little harder to define, but so much more helpful in my opinion.

(00:19:19):
It's what I call a market health metric, and this is basically think of your proxy that is the best predictor of your liquidity. So, I'll use the example of Lyft. You have your liquidity is your demand utilization, it's how many app opens turn into a ride, and what predicts this? What will predict you and deciding to book a ride? For Lyft and for Uber, it was ETAs. So, we knew that if the closest driver was at least two minutes away from you or closer, then we had hit a ceiling, you were more than X person likely to convert and book a ride. If it's more than two minutes, if it's five, then maybe you check at Uber, maybe you walk, maybe you take the bus. If it's two minutes, it doesn't make a big enough difference, you're just going to book the ride anyway.

(00:20:06):
So find this threshold, find this predictor that tends to plateau that correlates strongly with retention but with also the transaction happening, and that's the metric that you can predict. That's a metric that's so much more actionable for teams to work against. If you're a supply team now you can think of, "Okay, I'm adding 100 supplies into the platform. I want to know if it's actually reducing ETAs in this case," or I can look at correlations like this and limiting some of the effect of those exhaustive factors that I mentioned.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:38):
Awesome. So, essentially watch fill rate is the term used that a lot of people love, which is just people with intent converting. So, the Airbnb example is exactly the way we did Airbnb is we looked at people that are searching with dates as intentful users, and then how many of them convert to a booking. So, that's basically what you're trying to get to, and your point here is that's kind of the output metric. That's what you want to move, but in order to move it, there's something that is the biggest lever to moving fill rate. And in your experience, and I've seen this exact same thing, it's usually amount of supply. Do you have enough good supply? And so, in the case of Lyft is do you have enough cars? Do you have enough homes, do you have enough plumbers on Thumbtack? And that's usually where you can actually impact fill rate. Sweet. 

Benjamin Lauzier (00:21:25):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:26):
And that becomes the goal of the team, that becomes the focus of the company, basically drive that up in all the little markets you're in and all the categories you're in.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:21:34):
Exactly. Yeah, completely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:36):
Awesome. You mentioned this idea of product market fit and the things change, pre-product market fit, post-product market fit. Classic question, I'm curious if you have any insights here, just what tells you that you've climbed that hill of product market fit, that you might have product market fit, or you definitely have product market fit in a marketplace?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:21:55):
It's hard because to me, the two are most independent. Maybe this is a hot take, but I feel like product market fit is independent of your marketplace dynamics. You might have a great product, and it provides amazing value to both sides, but you have yet to crack the flywheel on the supply side for how to bring those people. You don't have the right product channel fit, for example. And so, this will have a massive impact on the dynamics of your marketplace. And so, to me, my answer would tend to be pretty classical, it would be like measure your product market fit the way you would for a normal company. So yeah, it's a bit of an art more than the science, but I like the classic if we were to take this product away, what percentage of users would be significantly disappointed or have no other solution?

(00:22:50):
So, questions like this I think go to the heart of how valuable is your solution to users, and you can do this on the supply side and the demand side. I think here my advice is typically to consider that you have two product market fits essentially. You want to make sure that you have a compelling enough value proposition on both sides of the marketplace, and very often at the beginning you find product market fit on the demand side, but you realize it's not compelling enough for your suppliers because your margins are too high or something like that. So, realizing that you have both those things, but I think you can measure them in a way that's relatively traditional, and that's independent of marketplace dynamics.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:27):
I love that. We actually just had Sean Ellis on the podcast talking about that exact survey, the Sean Ellis test of asking people how disappointed would you be if they left, if the product didn't exist. And I just love that you keep coming back to this point that I 100% agree with, that most of the challenges you have with a marketplace business, 90% are the same challenges you'll have with a non-marketplace business. And people over-focus on, "Oh, I need to think of this like a marketplace, and all the marketplace science behind all this stuff." And really it's all the same stuff every founder is dealing with product market fit, except you have two sides of it growth strategy, but you have two sides of it. So, I love that you keep going back to that. 

(00:24:10):
Something that I definitely want to touch on is when people are thinking about starting a marketplace company, what are signals that a marketplace is a good model for the idea? Because I think a lot of people come into and be like, "I want to build a marketplace. Oh, I'm going to connect these two sides. It's going to be great," and there's no marketplace in this business, in this vertical. What are signs that marketplace dynamic and a business model is right for an idea versus no, it's not?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:24:40):
No one ever say like, "Oh, I'm going to build Airbnb for X," it's not something that people say. I think the signs that come to mind are one, higher fragmentation. I think you want this long tail of buyers and sellers without a handful of big players controlling the market, because this is where you can provide value by doing this job of aggregation. I think you also want a relatively uniform set of needs. That means that it can be, like your supply can be commoditized to some extent. This is what's so tricky, by the way, about services, service marketplaces like Thumbtack, because unlike eBay, where sellers, they just want to sell very clear and distinct inventory, on Thumbtack you have electricians who only want certain types of jobs, but they only want it if they're available that day. And they might take a job and cancel it because something better comes up.

(00:25:34):
And so, this makes for a very fuzzy definition of supply, and you have very different set of needs. One electrician wants something, the other one has a very different perception of the same unit of demand, and that makes it very, very difficult. So, it's feasible, but I would say that is not a compelling attribute for building a marketplace. So, a relatively uniform set of needs. And the last one I'd mention is a high enough bearer in the matchmaking or the creation. I think how hard it is for people to find each other today, and how much effort do they have to put in to vet each other, I think is another great sign. The higher it is, the bigger the opportunity because it means you come in, implement the right processes to simplify this exchange of value.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:24):
Awesome. I'd love to know if there's any examples you can think of, of bad marketplace ideas that people have tried, but I'll summarize the three points you just made, which I love. So, these are signs that this is a great opportunity for marketplace business, that there's a lot of fragmentation on both sides. There's not just a small number of companies or customers on one side or the other, because if there are, why do they need you? There's five airlines or whatever, you don't need a marketplace to match with an airline. Then two is there's uniform needs, the needs are basically consistent. I just want to stay in a home, I want a car to take me somewhere, I want a plumber.

(00:27:04):
And then there's a barrier, there's complexity to the matchmaking and helping someone book the thing, work with them. Finding a car, I imagine is like, I'm not going to just flag down a car. There's challenge there. I'm not going to just go and ask someone, "Can I stay in your home?" There's challenges there.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:27:19):
Exactly. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:20):
Awesome. Are there any examples of companies you've seen that are just like, that will never work as a marketplace, or here's a funny example of a marketplace that tried to be a marketplace and it's not ...

Benjamin Lauzier (00:27:29):
I don't have a great example of that, but I can give you a tangentially related example of a marketplace that I don't want to throw anyone under the bus. I respect the company and the effort, but Sidecar at the time was another ride-sharing company competing with Lyft and Uber, and there's, I'm sure a whole bunch of lessons there. They ended up closing, but I think one really interesting direction that they took pretty early on to differentiate themselves was, in my mind perhaps very naively a mistake, they decided to give complete control to the user where as a user you had a whole bunch of filters. You could decide, "I want a car that's at least 2015 or newer. I want a driver that's at least this or newer." And so, I think the theory was reasonable on paper. It was like, "Hey, let's give people more control over it."

(00:28:29):
But you have those other players out there, you have Lyft and Uber, and people feel forced in this standardized experience, "We're going to compete by giving you the choice, you get to decide the experience that you want." I think in reality, it just fragments your marketplace even further, and you have this hyper fragmentation in your marketplace, and I think it hurt their SLAs quite drastically. If you think about the ETA, when you ask explicitly you're like, "Yeah, sure, I want a newer car," and you slide it to 2020 not realizing that you just lost 10 minutes because now we had a great driver, but they have a Honda Civic from 2018, and it's not the special that you wanted. 

(00:29:08):
So, I think people who build marketplaces tend to want to give a lot of control to the users because this is what users want, or this is what comes up oftentimes in user feedback like, "Oh, we have those two distinct group of users. Those ones, they really want new cars. Those ones, they don't want new cars." And so, naturally you have a product team that builds the toggle to get the new cars, and I think the mistake is that you unknowingly fragment your supply in a way that has a much more meaningful impact on the health of your marketplace than you suspect. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:43):
I think this is another awesome example of don't over listen to users and do what you think is going to be best for the business, and this is not even a marketplace lesson. It's just generally you don't want to give users more options than they will need to be successful and happy. And I think Sidecar did that because they were trying to differentiate from Lyft and Uber, like, "What can we do differently?" And they're like, "Oh, let's give people all these options." I think they even let drivers choose the price that they're offering their ride at, which made it extra complicated. They're like, "Oh my God, all these cars at different prices," but I respect their attempt because they were just the third wheel, no pun intended.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:30:21):
Ironically, it's almost the opposite advice that I usually give to companies who struggle with market health, it's if you have different verticals, try if possible to open up your supply walls. Your user is telling you like X, but try to give them something that is tangential to what you think they want, because odds are that they are actually fine with it. There's this amazing example from Thumbtack, it's the smoke machine example. So Thumbtack, now they specialize a little bit more in home services, but a few years ago they were also doing a lot of events. So, you had DJs, you had photographers, and a lot of people were hiring for wedding DJs on the platform. And one of the checkboxes was a smoke machine, and it turns out a lot of people are checking this. You're like, "Yeah, hell yeah, I want a smoke machine at my wedding."

(00:31:14):
And unknowingly to them, obviously, only 5% of our DJs had a smoke machine, and so you would carve out 95% of our supply. And if when we talked to users, they were like, "Oh, no, no, I don't care that much about the smoke machine. I didn't realize that this was automatically going to remove half of the supply." And so, work on ways to make this checkbox affect the ranking but not the actual filtering is a great example of how you can listen to your users and tweak the experience, but simplify their cognitive load by knowing like, "Hey, we know you prefer a smoke machine, but we're intelligent enough to know it's probably not a deal breaker for you."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:54):
I love that example. The other thing that I think is important to talk about briefly is when you're thinking about building a marketplace, a lot of times they fail because the business model just doesn't work. I think about a company like Cherry that tried to do Uber for car washes, and in theory there's a smart idea of I'm going to just do on-demand car wash. The problem is no one's going to pay what it costs to do that, to a car wash person shows up and washes your car. I think cleaning is another example. There's also just like going-

Benjamin Lauzier (00:32:26):
Exec is another one that comes to mind.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:27):
Oh Exec, yeah, where it's just like someone come does stuff for you.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:32:32):
Something, yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:32):
Yeah. And so I guess, is there anything you want to add there? Just like this is another reason your marketplace might fail? And maybe just let me expand on this question. Just what are the most common reasons marketplaces fail in your experience? And I think it's important to say most marketplace ideas fail, just like most startup ideas fail.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:32:49):
Yeah, most ideas period fail, I think. Yes. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:51):
Most ideas period fail, same. Coming back to most of the things you're going to struggle with are the same things that every company struggles with outside of marketplace. So, let me just ask, is maybe specifically within marketplaces or even just broadly, what are the biggest reasons that marketplaces fail?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:33:06):
I think a few things come to mind. One is this concept of liquidity that we've talked about. So, you need to kick off this flywheel, you need to build enough of that density within your marketplace. And depending on the business, you can take a lot of time or money, and without the right diagnostic framework you can end up running out of both. And so it's like, that's the same one, and I felt this at Lyft, I've seen this at other companies, this rush like, "Wow, we have to get to this point, otherwise we know it's a losing battle until we have enough density for both sides to have a good enough experience." The other one that I see is ignoring one side. So, we talked about doing that when you're early on, but I see a lot of larger companies operating for too long as one-sided businesses. Many large marketplaces only thinking about their demand side funnel.

(00:34:01):
So they run ads, they get clicks, they turn those clicks into dollars, and they try to get enough supplies that intuitively the experience is good enough for users. And my advice is, if you're doing this you're missing out on half of your business. And the trick is marketplaces are very laggy, so once your network effects start to die down it turns into this moment of panic of, "Oh shoot, we forgot about half of our users. We forgot that sellers are people too, and they're all leaving, and now we need to completely transform our product to save the ship, and to create a compelling value proposition on their side." So, that's the other thing that I see is businesses realizing that they are marketplaces with true marketplace needs too late in the game. And the last one is quality. I think we talked a little bit about the quality before, but it doesn't mean that you always need to have the best quality in your marketplace, but being a marketplace implies a level of curation.

(00:34:58):
You need to be intentional about the quality that you aim to provide, and I think a lot of companies don't have necessarily that intentionality and you have this constant push of supply, "If only we'd lower our bar a little bit, we could get more supply." And so until you end up, we've all experienced this at some point, you found some e-commerce website, you look for something and there is also like, "Oh my god, this looks super shady," because all the sellers don't look that great. That's a quality problem. And so, you need to be intentional about your quality and I think that's another area where companies fail.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:31):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC II, ISO 27,001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risk. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A dot com slash Lenny. 

(00:36:23):
Kind of as a segue from that idea of quality, I want to talk about managed marketplaces, managed supply. So, I think the reason quality is such an issue for marketplaces is because you do not own the supply and control the supply your marketplace, you're not just selling something, quality is innately going to be a challenge. Airbnb doesn't own homes, Uber doesn't employee drivers. They can't even legally tell them exactly what to do because their contractors, so quality is always this ongoing challenge with marketplaces. So, there's always this push towards making it more of a managed marketplace. We give people a lot more instruction, maybe they own some of the supply, maybe they invest a lot in training, all that kind of stuff. And in a perfect world, not unlike an idealized world, quality will be best if you own it. But then you're no longer marketplace, your business model sucks. I guess just any thoughts on marketplaces that are considering becoming more managed? Any advice on when it makes sense to move towards that spectrum, and how far to go?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:37:27):
I think when you're running a marketplace, you tend to sit in your ivory tower a little bit looking at stats and thinking, "If only we could get people to do X, it'd be better for everyone." And I certainly did that in my career. I think that's missing the point that we're humans, and I think sometimes we act in ways that are non-deterministic or intuitive. I'll mention another example, but we'd originally sell leads to pros like plumbers and electricians. And of those leads, obviously only a fraction would turn into actual jobs and revenue for those pros. So, we also saw that those pros were always great at converting leads into jobs. And so, naturally we thought that we could provide a more consistent experience for customers and for pros by improving their ROI and selling bookings directly to those pros. It's a common marketplace move, going from some version of lead to a direct booking.  

(00:38:22):
And digital, great. We knew we were going to improve their ROI by something like 20% maybe, and we launched this and pros hated it. They hated it because they actually subconsciously, they liked the thrill of the sale. They loved this contact with customer, and they sometimes completely overestimated their ability to close the customer. They were like, "You took all those phone calls, they kept me busy. I felt like I was hustling, I was about to close this customer." And so, no matter what the data says of like, "Oh, we increased their earnings by 20%," the pros don't feel this way and it's the right to feel however they want. And we saw the same thing at Lyft when trying to make driver earnings less volatile, we had to fight a lot of that perception and a lot of that peak end effect. So, my call-out here is any attempt at control can be really tricky and backfire in ways that are unpredictable.

(00:39:12):
You also touched on employment classification. In the U.S., when you talk about controlling supply, all the lawyers are like, "No, no, no, that's not something that we do." Because if you control your supply, then there can be legally classified as employees and be entitled to a whole bunch of benefits. So, my take on this in general is I'm a huge believer, and it really depends on the type of company I should say, obviously, but my take is I'm a huge believer in market forces and empowerment. So, provide guardrails for what a good experience is in your marketplace, set a clear bar for quality, and provide the right coaching and tools for supply to be successful. And then take a step back and see where the gaps are, and invest more in hands-on tactics just to close those gaps more specifically.

(00:40:02):
So, lots of coaching tools that Lyft, Uber did it, like most marketplaces provide some sort of coaching. You have a review system perhaps, you have stars for your sellers, for sellers who fall below the threshold then coach them, provide them the right tools, the right guidance, what is the standard that you have on your marketplace and help them meet that bar. And for people who fall through the gaps that you have, then that's when you invest in more hands-on tools. And this is one of the things that we did at Lyft also with the rental company that we spent up. I'm happy to tell you more about that, that's interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:40):
I'd love to hear about that. Before we hear that, is there any marketplace that has been very good at upleveling quality without becoming managed, that did this really well that you can think of?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:40:54):
Yeah, there's a talent marketplace called Toptal, and they are specialized in this. They have a really high bar for quality, they claim to only have the top 1%, top 3% I believe, of talent there. And they have a really amazing set of checks and processes. This funny story from them, but apparently they advertise something maybe a 3% pass rate for their talent, so they only on board like 3% of the people who apply. And allegedly their actual pass rate is even lower than that, but they thought that if they actually advertise the actual number it would sound fake. And so, they actually say 3% because 1% would sound like too ridiculous and it would discredit their talent. So, they're one company that does a tremendous amount of work for vetting quality early on with a ton of different checks, but also maintaining that quality. So, throughout with the right coaching tools, with education and things like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:06):
That's a really good example. And so, basically they just vet and only approve high quality supply in their case. It's mostly engineers, right? I think on Toptal?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:42:16):
Correct. Yes, it's mostly engineers, designers, I think.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:18):
Which you can only do if you have so much supply that has so much interest in becoming part of your platform, but that's a really cool example. Basically it's just only allow really high quality supply. Let's hear this rental car story, so this is Lyft trying to do rental cars, right?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:42:32):
Correct. Yes, yes. Yeah, so this is a little bit of context. I was leading the driver's side of product at Lyft, and General Motors had invested half a billion dollars in our last round of funding. And this was Christmas Eve, I'll always remember, I got a call from Lyft CEO and General Motors CTO, and we decided to build a rental company essentially. And the reason for it was really fascinating. GM had all those vehicles that were coming off of lease, and that they were forced to sell at auctions they didn't really know what to do with. And from our perspective, we had this massive supply gap. We've talked about this before, but we had this huge supply crunch, we were growing super fast and couldn't hire drivers fast enough, couldn't onboard drivers fast enough. And when we looked at the market, we realized that 50% of the job seekers and welfare recipients in the U.S. don't have a car.

(00:43:26):
So, that was our supply gap. This was a huge pool of people that we just couldn't tap into because they didn't have a car. And so, by renting cars we could essentially manufacture our own supply. We could dial this up and down, we could be very surgical about how many vehicles do we bring in, which markets do we bring this in, at what price? We could even offer to pay for the car if they drove 30 hours a week and completely transform the lives of those people, now we allow them to have true mobility. They can go buy groceries, they can go take the kids on vacation. So, a huge win-win for everybody with something like this. And I think in few months we had built a rental company from the ground up, and within 18 months I think we were the fourth-largest rental fleet in the U.S. 

(00:44:10):
But all of this stemmed from this gap that we saw of like, okay, it's not about controlling the drivers in general. It's about like, okay, we want to be surgical. We want to control the quality of the cars on the platform. So, we talked about that, that's a great example. In the markets where we thought the vehicles of quality was too low, we knew we could onboard more rental vehicles that were more recent to raise the average age of a vehicle on the platform. So, it gave us more control in a much more surgical way, I guess.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:44):
So, it's not that you are launching a rental car service, the idea was add supply and give drivers a car so that they could become drivers.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:44:54):
It was a bit of both. We actually launched, it was we had vehicles that drivers could rent from Lyft, and to drive on the platform, and also to drive for their personal needs essentially. But yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:10):
Got it, okay. And then, did this actually work and have impact? Was this a good idea?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:45:16):
Yeah. Yeah, it had a tremendous impact. Like I mentioned, I think we scaled this exponentially to become, I think again, the fourth-largest rental fleet in the U.S. because it was so effective for us, both because we had the right amount of control, but also those drivers were incredibly loyal to us. We had a whole bunch of other incentives that we could do, we could offer to pay for the car but only if you don't drive for the competition for Uber, and only if you drive at least 30 hours a week. So, this again provided us with, again, much greater retention, much higher engagement, and was a real incentive for us but also for the drivers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:59):
Awesome. And maybe the reason it's most interesting is this is along the spectrum of a managed marketplace. It moves closer to you guys are paying and covering costs of cars. It makes it less just like this simple, highly efficient marketplace.

Benjamin Lauzier (00:46:15):
Exactly, yeah. It's the marketplace version of maybe your black car fleet owner has their fleet of vehicle and they have people. So, this was the marketplace version of doing that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:26):
And it's also just a differentiator, because GM and you guys were close, and so you had this lever that say Uber didn't have. Amazing. Another area that I know you spent time on that I think is really interesting, and I think it'd be helpful to people to hear is the mentorship program, and the ambassador program that you had at Lyft, and how that helped you scale much more quickly than other folks were able to. Can you share that story?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:46:52):
Pretty early on at Lyft, this was 2014, 2015 maybe, Uber was basically 30X our size. They had 30 times more revenue, more people, more liquidity, everything you can think of. They were growing like crazy, and we had a bit of this existential moment, as you can imagine, where we were wondering how we're supposed to compete with that. And we had to be super clever, everything that you did at the company had to be 10 times more efficient per person than the competition just to survive. That was the bar, just not to die, and put a lot of pressure on us but we basically found a clever way of onboarding drivers at a fraction of the cost and resources. So, let me give you a little bit of context on how the onboarding flow worked. So, at the time, the last step to get onboarded as a driver was after you background check and your driving record check came back, you had to do a visual inspection of your car, a quick test drive, some light training, and we would check your documents.

(00:47:53):
We would check that you are the person with a driver's license and all those things. And Uber at the time would launch a team on the ground, they would go and open an office and they would have DMV-style group onboarding sessions and car inspections. And we did this as well in our first three to four markets, but you can imagine the overhead and the lead time. You had to go and you had to find office space, sign the lease, hire employees, you had huge, huge lead time. And we thought about it, and at the time a huge competitive differentiator for us was our brand. As a passenger or as a driver, why would you use a platform with lower liquidity? As a driver, you had lower earnings guaranteed. As a passenger, you had longer wait times. Why would you use a service like that? You do because of the brand, because of its values, it's how it makes you feel.

(00:48:41):
And so, we had the pink mustaches at the time, we had this very strong brand identity. I think a lot of that has been lost now, but we also had this amazing community of drivers who were fierce advocates for the brand. And so, what we did is leveraging this community and building essentially a soft onboarding supply engine where we would pay our best drivers $35 per mentor session, and a mentor session was essentially replacing this onboarding flow. So, it was basically another driver looking at your vehicle to check all your documents, take photos of your driver's license and all that stuff, and take you on a short ride along. And the benefits of this were absolutely mind-blowing and kind of unexpected for us on all sides. First, the mentors were our very best drivers, and they were evangelists for the brand. So, what they did was they would share personal tips on when and where to drive.

(00:49:34):
Oftentimes they shared their contact info. And this created tremendous leverage and social proof for those new drivers who were on the fence about taking strangers into their car. It's actually quite funny because we had the brightest minds in the company writing the best marketing emails and copy, like, "Hey, hop on the car and drive this Saturday." And you had all those drivers and all those mentors like, "No, no, don't listen to those Lyft guys. Here's what you should do. Go on Tuesday at 2:00 PM, text me, I'll tell you where the good spot is, and this is how you're going to get rides. This is how you're going to get rich and make a lot of money." And this recognition lever was just so much more powerful than anything we could be telling you. And so, very, very efficient activation lever for the new drivers. For us, also incredibly scalable.

(00:50:22):
We could fly a small team to rigorously vet and onboard maybe like 10, 20 top drivers, and then they'd fly to a different market, and we would let the rest of our drivers be onboarded by those mentors. And even for those mentors, for those top drivers, it was an incredible recognition lever. For them, if you were a 4.9 driver, you had enough rides, you had a chance to make it into being a mentor, and this provided additional earnings opportunity for you. If you did two mentor sessions in an hour, you could make 70 bucks an hour. You could take a break from driving if you're tired, and just do some of those. It felt like getting promoted at a job. And so, it actually had a huge impact on the retention of our very best drivers, which was unexpected. So, a lot of really, really interesting benefits, and we actually lean into this and built a couple of really fascinating variations of this for a while, but this allowed us to match most of Uber's footprint with a 10th or a 20th of the resources at incredible speed, I guess.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:21):
That is an amazing story, and it's such a great lever that I totally agree, I don't hear people using and I wonder why. So, what I'm hearing is it was cheaper, the drivers were making money. I imagine the drivers trained by the mentors ended up being better drivers, that's what we saw at Airbnb, hosts that came in through a referral ended up being better hosts, for whatever reason. And you're saying basically, this is what allowed you to compete with Uber at a much smaller scale and much less money raised. Amazing. 

Benjamin Lauzier (00:51:51):
Exactly. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:52):
You said there's a couple of variations. Is there anything interesting there to share, just things that you built as a follow-up based on the success?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:51:58):
So, the next step in that journey was basically we were growing like crazy, but now we had cracks in like the activation phase, but now we had a whole bunch of people dropping off in the funnel before activation]. So, they didn't enter their SSN, they didn't enter the right info for us to run all those checks in the previous steps of the onboarding flow. So, we built a team of hundreds of account executives, and their job was just pick up the phone and call those drivers. And so, we had the same aha moment of like could we get some of our best drivers to do that for us, and empower them to be a part of this? And so, we did this and we launched another, like I said, role. We called them recruiters. And so, as a recruiter, as a driver, you could just, if this was quiet on the road, you could just hop on your phone and you would have a mini sales dashboard where you could claim leads.

(00:52:49):
And this was a driver who had dropped off in the funnel, and you had a telephone number, you could just call them and text them. And same thing, those guys were outperforming our very best of trained salespeople, because it's not like, "Hey, it's Ben from Lyft. Hop on the road, please." It's like, "Hey, my name is James and I'm a fellow driver as well. Lyft told me that you have a incomplete application. Do you have any questions? Do you want me to come to your house, we can do this together?" And we would pay them 20 bucks per person that they converted to activation. And so, something incredibly scalable for us, another way for us to reward and recognize our best drivers.

(00:53:27):
And it also provided a really interesting way for us to smooth out the supply and demand. The problem with a marketplace like Lyft is that you have this big spike. Everyone wants to drive on a Tuesday at 2:00 PM, but everyone wants rides on a Saturday at 2:00 AM. And so, how can you manufacture demand during those low utilization times? This was a great way to do that. Now you could wait on the road and still make money while just sitting in your car while waiting for the next ride. So, this was another iteration of this model that was really cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:58):
Amazing. That is so cool. I just know the feeling of being on a team, coming up with this idea and the thing working must feel so great. Just like, "Holy shit, look at this. Look at all these cool things that we can do with our supply." Something I wasn't going to get into, but it might be interesting just to hear if you have thoughts on this. So, I've been a huge fan of Lyft from the beginning, I used Lyft the very first weekend it came out in San Francisco when there was like five drivers. It was like a beta test, I was friends with someone that worked at Lyft early on, and it was just like, "Man, Lyft's the best." I was like all Lyft, Uber sucks, I hate that. I want to give it the fist bump or the mustache. So great. Today though, I was just looking at market caps.

(00:54:38):
So, Uber is worth $150 billion, Lyft is worth $5 billion. I'm curious if you have thoughts on just, it feels like Uber has won at this point, and I don't know where Lyft goes. I know your heart is with Lyft and you worked at Lyft for a long time, I know it doesn't feel great to see how things have played out necessarily. I'm curious just to hear your take on just what do you think Uber did, if you look back, that allowed them to basically win? And where do you think Lyft goes from here? What do you think happens with Lyft? They're still worth 5 billion, it's still a huge, amazing, successful business, but just where do you think things go?

Benjamin Lauzier (00:55:15):
Yeah. I think it all went south when I left the company. I'm just kidding. No, and again, I have to call out the fact that I haven't been close to Lyft, and their business and strategy for many years at this point. So, take this with a grain of salt. This is my very naive perspective, but I think to me, perhaps the biggest blow to Lyft's business was somewhat inherent, like the vision. Lyft's vision was always anchored around transportation, people of transportation. The founders were deeply passionate about moving people, they were passionate about transforming the way people move around in a city. They wanted to just change how cities are designed, how roads are designed. And so, that meant investing in dynamic shuttles and things like that, and there's a lot of experimentation that went to that. But it also meant that Lyft never invested in things like food delivery, or goods and parcels, and things like that.

(00:56:26):
And I think that crushed them during COVID essentially. I think Uber had, I think at some point their slogan was moving in bits and atoms, or something like that. But I think it implies this notion of being a logistics platform for assets in the world, for transporting people, for transporting things, for transporting ... And I think they built, they invested lot in trucks and food delivery, and all those really exotic things that Lyft had never any intention to invest in. Not even because of the lack of resources, but because this was in part a distraction from our vision. We wanted to change how people move around in cities, we wanted to reinvent public transportation, we did not want to be a DoorDash competitor and help you get in donuts during COVID. And a huge part of it also was leaning heavily in shared rides. And so, this was like, again, how do you reinvent public transportation?

(00:57:28):
It's like every car is a dynamic bus, and now there's a bus line. The bus line is always running, it's always by your house. So, a lot of our investment I think in thinking went in that direction, and the last thing that people wanted with COVID was to be in a car with five strangers, but what people wanted is food delivered to their house. And so, I know that the business had a huge blow during COVID, whereas I think Uber was able to rebound much more quickly because of how diversified the business was. And so, it's funny now because I think Lyft actually killed shared rides, which was just so core to their identity. They were the first ones to launch this. And so yeah, the new COO I think killed the shared rides, which actually I'm really sad about. But yeah, so I think it indicates a very different vision now, a very different direction for the business. And yeah, that's my take, I guess.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:19):
Interesting. So, essentially COVID really effed them because their strategy was always about transportation, and when nobody needs a ride and people want food, strategically Uber made a really good move expanding into food delivery, which I think was a bigger business than rides for a long time. I don't know where it's at today for Uber, and Lyft didn't have that, and it's hard to recover from a time like that. So, it sounds like it's a combination of strategy was pointing Lyft in a certain direction, and circumstances in the world just made it really hard-

Benjamin Lauzier (00:58:50):
And losing me me. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:51):
And losing Ben. So, you left in 2019, March 2019, and is that when they went public? 

Benjamin Lauzier (00:58:52):
Not for the IPO.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:59):
Yeah, and it's all downhill from then. And then-

Benjamin Lauzier (00:59:03):
I'm telling you. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:04):
... during COVID actually, when there was a big bump, which I think when people started riding again, and then it went down again. So, I think there was a correlation there, so there we go. That's the thing, don't ever fire Ben, don't let Ben leave. That's our take on it. 

Benjamin Lauzier (00:59:16):
I was not fired, yeah. Just to be clear.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:18):
Okay, just different ways you might leave a company, don't let it happen. 

Benjamin Lauzier (00:59:23):
I know, I'm kidding.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:25):
Okay, so there's two more things I want to spend a little time on before we close up. One is your work in Europe, so you're a product leader in Europe, and I want to hear a little bit about what it's like to be a product person in Europe. And then two, I want to hear about the startup. So, at this point no one can actually fire. You have your own company that you're running, and I want to spend a little time here. Usually we don't spend time on this sort of stuff, but you're working on something very cool that I think is going to be really helpful to a lot of people in a really meaningful way. So, I want to spend a little time there. But before that, so you're living in France now. Before you started your company, you were interviewing for CPR roles in France, you work with a lot of French companies, European companies. I'm curious what you've noticed might be different in the cultures of tech companies in France and Europe in general versus the U.S.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:00:12):
It's been really fascinating, I think. So, my entire career has been in the U.S., and I'm just starting to understand what that European and the French market in particular looks like. And my read so far is that product management has really exploded I think in Europe in recent years, but the market dynamics are still quite different. In the U.S. I think you have this inherently very liquid and dynamic market. I think, this is my interpretation of it, but I think it leads to greater ownership and accountability for people and product at all levels. So, product managers and leaders, they join a startup and you're immediately in charge of a relatively meaningful piece of the business, with genuine autonomy oftentimes. It doesn't always happen, but oftentimes I think that's the case. And if things don't work out, well, there's this expectation that you'll be managed out.

(01:01:09):
There are countless memes on LinkedIn about the tenure of CPOs at tech companies to illustrate that. I think in France the market is much less liquid, so it's incredibly difficult to change jobs, and it's very expensive to fire someone in France. So, it seems to lead to two effects beyond the obvious job security. One is, I think PMs tend to have less autonomy and ownership, and a little bit more like micromanagement. And there are also less business owners than they can be in the U.S. And I see founders and managers struggling to let go of control a little bit more, again because it's understandable in a way, you don't have as much of a control as you do in the U.S. And so, you see a lot of really fascinating effects.

(01:01:55):
You have startups who tend to wait a little bit longer before hiring, especially in product. The art of product a little bit less of a thing. You have a lot of amazing PMs in France, but the recognition of the craft is a little bit different outside of the people who practice it. And you have a lot of real interesting outsourcing also, you see startups and companies of all sizes actually relying on great product studios, like Mozza, to build end-to-end products from the ground up. So, something that's been really, really interesting. Another side that I see is this dominance of business over tech in France.

(01:02:35):
There isn't as much of a cult of technology and software engineering in France as there is in the U.S. And so, the French Ivy League schools are business schools, like HEC, and the most highly valuable skill that you get is soft skills around management and business. It differs from the stereotype of the CS degree, Stanford dropout that you have in Silicon Valley. And I think because of a few of those things that I just mentioned, less liquid job market, but also less liquid financial markets, the last thing that I've observed that's interesting that's also around ownership I guess, is equity is much less meaningful in France. So, of the product leaders that I talked to, most of them consider their equity to be virtually worthless. None of them know of anyone who's made a down payment on a house thanks to their sort of equity.

(01:03:25):
So, it's seen as a nice bonus, but it's not the token of ownership and the promise of future wealth that it can be in the U.S. when you join a startup. For exec roles, I think it's often sub 10% of their total compensation, whereas in the U.S. it's very often more than 50% of your compensation will be equity. So, that's been interesting in terms of the dynamic, but it's also been real interesting to just see how vibrant the startup culture is here in France. You have a truly exciting innovation happening, especially in AI. You have a lot of French companies at the forefront of this, like Mistral AI and Hugging Face, and things like that.

(01:04:03):
And also how it's been exciting to see how the government is leaning into that as a catalyst for this innovation. I think the French government has dedicated something like $2.5 billion in funding to support French AI excellence by 2030. So, they're running a lot of internal government incubators to try to disrupt some of the government functions from the inside, and they're hiring top talents to do that. I've met some of the people working on this, it's just really fascinating. It makes me super excited about what a federal startup task of reinventing [inaudible 01:04:38] would look like. So yeah, it's been really exciting to see the whole space and how it differs from the U.S.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:45):
Fascinating. So, I know there's also AI regulation that feels really strange in Europe, but think that's EU based, not like France specifically.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:04:46):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:55):
Yeah, that people are not excited about. There's just a lot of fear of AI, and so there's a lot of regulation talk in Europe.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:05:02):
I'm a big Android guy, and a lot of the features like Gemini and all this is only available in the U.S., and now that I'm in France I see the difference a little bit.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:12):
Interesting. So, the cultural differences you spoke of, do you think they're rooted in the fact that people don't move jobs often, or is it culture? People just don't learn to work in the way that people learn to work in the U.S. in the product role? What do you think is the root of why things are so different?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:05:35):
I'm not quite sure, it's a good question. My take, and I think this is I'm sure very naive and reductive, and I know this is one of my core principles, so I'm sure I also have a tunnel vision on this a little bit. But to me, one of the biggest difference that I see is really around this concept of ownership and accountability. Whereas in the U.S., and again, I saw it, I'm sure you saw it at Airbnb, you see it at a lot of companies, not everywhere, but a lot of companies will hire you, give you a big chunk of the business, and it's up to you to prove yourself out. Where you have six months, you have a year, it's up to you to show impact. I think the French employment model is less conducive to this type of dynamic, because employment is much more rigid.

(01:06:20):
So, you have much less of this hire now and prove yourself out, it's much more of prove yourself beforehand. And if you've made a bad hire than as a founder, you become perhaps a little bit cagey about your vision. You want to be more hands-on because you made a bad hire. It's not like someone perfect, then he'll make you work but it means you'll be more hands-on in the work of PMs daily, and perhaps we'll think like, "Oh, maybe I don't need product managers who want on my vision, I'll hire project managers," or something like that. So, it's perhaps slightly more conducive to those types of dynamics.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:53):
And you're saying that's in part because it's harder to fire people in France and in Europe?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:06:58):
Yeah, I think so. It's not just about firing I think, to be clear, I just think it's culturally the market seems like a lot less liquid and dynamic.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:05):
So, people don't move around as much, they stick around for a long time.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:07:10):
Yeah, exactly. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:11):
Got it. And it sounds like there's also just a cultural difference of founders innately are much more, "I am in control, and I'm not going to hire people and trust you to take this thing on. I'm just going to run the show." It's basically Paul Graham's founder mode is already instilled in everyone.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:07:29):
Maybe yeah, maybe that's a little bit. And I think also it's this culture of business, so very business-centric sort of culture. And again, it makes sense, the markets, you have less venture capital, you have less equity in the financial markets as well. And so, when you raise funding you need to have a strong business case. The business case is at the center of your habits. Whereas I think oftentimes in the U.S. you have, again, it's a little bit stereotypical, but it's a very tech or product-centric view of the world, or it can be a very tech or product-centric view of the world where it'll be like this product, this is the vision of the product, and sometimes even the business model will follow. And in France, I think the business model has to be front and center perhaps for you to be able to raise venture capital for you to be able to even exist. So, it means it attracts a lot of business minded entrepreneurs, much more so perhaps than tech-minded or product-minded entrepreneurs.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:29):
Got it. If someone wants to help their company in Europe and France operate more closely to the way companies in the U.S. operate, do you have any advice for them? I know you talk and work with a lot of companies in Europe, what do you help them change and see differently?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:08:47):
Yeah, it's a great question. I haven't fully cracked that, and think it's a really hard question. I'll give some sort of small pointers that have helped at least some of the companies that I've talked to. But the one is equity, I think there's a desire from a lot of the founders that I talk to, to give equity to employees, but because it's not in the culture yet I think employees also have an under-appreciation for equity. Like, "Well yeah, it's nice, but I don't know what's going to happen. I just work for the CEO anyways." There's less of this sense of, again, ownership that you can have in the U.S.

(01:09:22):
And so, I think leaning into that and investing in education around equity, the case is also in the U.S., I'm convinced 80% of people just don't fully understand their equity. But I think leaning into that, especially in Europe, to help people understand the value of their equity, help them by telling more about the story of the business, the trajectory of the business, why it matters for their future equity. I think anything along those lines I think can help cultivate this greater ownership mindset, I think for people.

(01:09:58):
And then yeah, I think another big piece again is, at least to me this is a big recipe to successful product teams, is to develop teams that revolve around this concept of ownership and accountability teams that are clearly owning a huge, or it doesn't have to be huge, like a slice of the business, not feature teams like shipping maybe guests, but teams that have clear accountability with consequences, but also clear ownership and leeway to do their best and to thrive.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:29):
Again, I usually don't spend time on this sort of thing, but I just think that what you're working on is extremely cool, and I think it's going to be really meaningful to a lot of people. And so, I just want to spend a few minutes giving you a chance to talk about what you're working on now. You started a company, is this your first company that you've started? 

Benjamin Lauzier (01:10:45):
It is, yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:45):
It is first company. 

Benjamin Lauzier (01:10:46):
First real company. Doesn't accept projects, but first company. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:48):
Yeah, there's a LC, there's a C corp, or yeah, it's like filed. There's paperwork. Amazing. Talk about what you're building, how people know how to find it if it's right for them.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:10:59):
Yeah, I have to say entrepreneurship has been a very humbling journey. I think the zero to one is way harder than anything us have done so far, and I feel like when you're used to building and scaling products within companies, you take for granted, at least I did, I take for granted that the problem space has already been validated. You have some brand equity, even if you launch a new vertical, there's an existing user base, there's a validation of the broader problem space. I think going to truly zero felt, at least to me, super overwhelming and lonely, but also super exciting with tons of condensed learnings. It's been a really interesting journey. So, what brought me there is my wife started to have some health issues about three years ago now, it's partially why we decided to move to France last year just for a couple of years.

(01:11:47):
And she's had this undiagnosed condition and chronic pain, and we saw just how much of a nightmare it was to manage her care and to navigate the healthcare system in the U.S. So, we'd wait three months for an appointment for a neurologist, then did see her for maybe eight minutes. Average appointment time in the U.S. is between 10 and 12 minutes. They'd dump a bunch of jargon, say like, "Hey, tests all look normal. Sorry, you should just go see this other specialist instead." Would wait another three months, see another specialist. And with a lot of anxiety, a lot of pain, as you can imagine, all those things, you have another eight minute slot with someone and you're like, "Oh, why didn't the neurologist do this test? I can help you, let's make some sense." And so, it ends up being incredibly isolating. The whole time we just felt completely alone.

(01:12:32):
It was just like us and Google, we felt we kept getting conflicting advice from doctors, and I was spending all my time researching specialists, what solutions to consider, spend all my nights reading through research papers to [inaudible 01:12:48], "Hey, what is the academic consensus on this particular treatment that the doctors don't seem to know about?" And throughout this whole process it felt like no one really had her back, no one within the medical system was fighting for her the way that your family doctor might have fought for you 20 years ago, knowing everything about you and being like, "Lenny, let's talk about this. I know your uncle had this," or there's this sort of a sense of advocacy that came from your family doctor that just doesn't exist today. It's not uncommon for doctors to have thousands of patients that they see just a few minutes each year.

(01:13:19):
And so digging into this, we just realized it's not an isolated case. You have nearly half of Americans have at least one chronic condition, or have to deal with some sort of complex health issue largely on their own. You see a lot of those large online communities revolving around chronic conditions or chronic pain, and trying to make sense of it and advocate for themselves. And I think I want to be clear, in my mind the problem is obviously not about the practitioners, it's systemic. It's just growing financial pressure from private equity firms, it's just countless other factors. But you see the physicians being overwhelmed, overworked, burning out, and you see that pressure just only increasing, I think. So, I basically spent the next six months just talking to hundreds of patients, and doctors, and experts, and what we built is basically a platform to help people fight for their health.

(01:14:12):
And so, we want to close the gap between patients and the healthcare system. There's this critical layer of the system that's missing, I think, people are navigating life-threatening or debilitating conditions largely with Google, and at some point you just get tired of fighting for yourself. So, we connect people with complex conditions, typically with their own health advocate. So, it's essentially like their own health assistant. They're available 24/7 to help you navigate your care. So, we find appointments for you, we help you prepare your appointment, we make sense of a diagnosis, of test results. We spend hours researching solutions and potential treatments, and just more generally we do everything we can to help you just better advocate for themselves basically. And now we launched in the U.S. a early version of this few weeks ago, and the engagement has been really, really, really mind-blowing so far. And we're helping cancer patients, people with a lot of those niche chronic conditions, and literally harassing the doctor's office like, "Hey, we still haven't received that referral."

(01:15:15):
All the things that you just get tired of doing when you're dealing with so many appointments, and when you're having to manage a condition like this. And our mental model is what would we do if this user was our partner or our parent? You'd likely spend all night combing through research. You'd call all the providers in the state to be like, "Hey, who has an appointment?" Because there's no PT available for the next two months. We'll find you a PT available sooner. So, we're building the engine to do that at scale essentially, and make people feel like they're not alone and that someone is fighting for them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:45):
Super cool. It's sad that we need something like this, but we do, because the healthcare system is so not ideal. And so, it's basically someone in your corner that's just, it's like in the inside that knows how these things work that is there to help you through the process. What's the company called, where do people find it?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:16:03):
Yeah, it's called Nurra Health, and our website is Nurra, N-U-R-R-A.me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:09):
Awesome, and we'll link to it in the show notes. And just to be clear, I'm not an investor, I'm just excited about this thing. I think a lot of people need this. Just to loop back to what we've been talking about, it's not a marketplace. How would you describe this business in relation to marketplace companies?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:16:22):
We're ignoring the marketplace dynamics. I'm following my own advice, and I'm one jumpstarting one side of the marketplace, the health advocates were like jumpstarting this side for now, and we're only focusing on what I think is going be the hardest side for us, and it's going to be demand. How do we find those people? How do we create the right value proposition for them? So, that's what we're focused on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:44):
And so, in the future there may be a marketplace component, is what I'm hearing?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:16:49):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:50):
Interesting. Very cool. Ben, is there anything else that you want to share, mention, leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:16:59):
No, no. Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:01):
Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Ben, are you ready?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:17:06):
I'm ready, let's do it. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:08):
All right. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:17:14):
I'll give you books in different directions. One is Misbehaving: The Makings of Behavioral Economics. I'm really interested in behavioral economics, I love this intersection between economics and human psychology. It's a great analogy for product, so that's a great introduction to this field. The second book that I recommend a lot is Range: Why Generalists Triumph in a Specialized World, by David Epstein. I've always felt curious about a lot of things, but it's made me feel like I'm decent at many things but I'm good at nothing. I'm very good at nothing. And so, even in my career I see all those pianists who are like machine learning gurus leading conferences on weekends that are contributing to think tanks, I just felt like a generalist.

(01:17:55):
So, if you feel this way, this is a good book to make you feel a little bit better by yourself and your imposter syndrome. At least it did for me. And last one, nothing to do with business, but Immune, by Philipp Dettmer. This is the creator of the YouTube channel Kurzgesagt. I don't know if I'm pronouncing this right, but it's a science channel. If you're even remotely curious about how your body works, how your immune system works, it's an amazing book that's really, really fun to read, super entertaining, and just great biology and fun book, I promise.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:26):
I've been trying to get the author of Range on the podcast, I have not had success yet. So, if anyone knows him, his name is Epstein? Is that right? 

Benjamin Lauzier (01:18:34):
Yes. David Epstein. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:36):
David Epstein, please connect me. I would love to have him on the podcast. I really love his message of just, basically it's the most successful people, or is it that you should be a generalist or that you can be very successful as a generalist? Is that the message?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:18:50):
You can be very successful as a generalist. Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:51):
Yeah, great. I completely agree. That's been me too. Next question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:18:58):
TV show? I haven't seen anything lately that's been mind-blowing, but I'll share an old new one. I've rewatched The Last of Us recently, and it's an old favorite. I love the TV show. I like the game, I played the game many years ago, and love the TV show

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:12):
When the heck's the next season coming up? I'm excited for that. Because I know the game has more-

Benjamin Lauzier (01:19:12):
2025.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:16):
2025. Oh man, so long. Okay, good to know though. Next question, do you have a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:19:25):
Maybe a little bit behind the curve on this one, but I've been loving the Arc browser. I don't know if you use it, but it's been-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:32):
Oh, I love Arc. It's my number one, my main browser. Absolutely, I love it.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:19:36):
Amazing. All right, so yeah, you know all about it. Yeah, it's been really fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:41):
Yeah, just the onboarding of the Arc browser is such a lesson in onboarding. They do such an amazing job. It's like that alone is a great thing to do as a product person, just see how they do onboarding.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:19:52):
I was like, I've been using Chrome for 12 years, or I don't know how many years, it feels like such high friction to change my entire life. In eight seconds it was done, it felt like home. I was like, "Wow, this is way faster than I expected."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:05):
Two more questions. Do you have a favorite motto that you often come back to or repeat yourself, share with friends or family?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:20:11):
I don't have anything particularly philosophical, unfortunately. I lived in [inaudible 01:20:16] for a few years. I live now in the French Alps, so I have a frame with a John Muir's quote, "The mountains are calling and I must go." I feel like this is, it's my grounding place. The mountains are my happy place, and so I don't share that work often. I don't peace out in the middle of meetings like, "The mountains are calling, I must go." But it's been a grounding motto, I guess, for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:38):
That's beautiful. My nervous system relaxes just hearing that quote, and I know you live in a mountainy part of France so you've done it, you've listened to the call. Final question. You live in France, the Olympics were just in Paris. Did you go to any of the games? Did you watch any of the games? Anything stand out to you about the Olympics that were not so far from where you are now?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:21:02):
Good question. I did not see any live events, unfortunately. Perhaps the highlight for me was I'm a big mountain biker, but in the biking realm I love the Men BMX event where all three men on the podium were French, so this was a great moment for France.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:25):
I didn't even know that was an Olympic sport. So, it's a BMX, like dirt bike kind of race.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:21:32):
Yeah, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:33):
So cool. Amazing. Ben, thank you so much for being here. Two final questions, where can folks find you online, and what else are you doing that people can check out if they want to learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:21:46):
Yeah, you can find me, two things that are perhaps helpful for people out there. One is I have a Reforge course if you're curious about marketplace, if you want to dig deeper into marketplace growth, I have a course on Reforge. We're about to do our fifth or sixth cohort I think now. It's been going really well, we've been working with tons of really, really cool marketplaces, going much deeper into some of the topics that we just talked about. So, if you're interested in marketplaces, I would say check this out.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:13):
And on that real quick, is the customer ideal, is it founders or is it like PMs at larger marketplace companies? Who is this perfect for?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:22:23):
We've had both founders and PMs, and like a heads of product, but it's my strong recommendation it's people that have product market fit. Per our conversation, if you don't have product market fit, wait a little bit before enrolling in this course. Focus on your core business before worrying about the marketplace dynamics aspect.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:44):
And then I cut you off, there's something else you were going to point people to?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:22:47):
Oh, and just Nurra, the company that we're building. Anyone that you know, or if you yourself have chronic or complex conditions, and if you feel like you need help managing your health and navigating your care, would love to help or share what you need, and how we can help you. And our website is Nurra.me, N-U-R-R-A.me. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:09):
And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Benjamin Lauzier (01:23:11):
If you have advice, if you know anyone in the space, if you're interested in learning more about this, if you have advice, if you have learnings, if you know anything about this I would love to hear it. If you have hot takes about marketplace, if you disagree with any of what I've said, I'd love to also hear it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:25):
I love it. Ben, thank you so much for being here.

Benjamin Lauzier (01:23:30):
Thank you so much for having me, it's been a dream come true. Finally, I'm on this podcast.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:34):
Same. Same for me, Ben. Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
Everyone's always complaining SEO's dead, it can't grow. Word of mouth is so hard. 

Brian Balfour (00:00:03):
All of the ingredients for new distribution platform are essentially happening. My prediction, the new distribution platform will be ChatGPT. There's a bunch of signals that they're about to launch that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:14):
This is a huge opportunity for companies to get on it. 

Brian Balfour (00:00:16):
It ends up being a prisoner's dilemma. Don't trick yourself into thinking that you can't play the game. The cycles seem to be getting shorter and shorter, so you actually have a smaller amount of time. If you don't do it, your competitors are going to go to the new platform and your customer expectations change. There is no opting out of the game. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:31):
This is the opportunity to disrupt an incumbent. 

Brian Balfour (00:00:33):
If you're a late-stage company, you place multiple bets. For startups, it's a totally different ballgame. You have to choose one and go all in. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:40):
Think about companies like Zynga that grew on Facebook and then became massive companies.

Brian Balfour (00:00:43):
Building a great product is one of those things that's necessary, but not sufficient. And actually the separation is between those that build really great distribution.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:52):
What would be the backup if not ChatGPT? 

Brian Balfour (00:00:54):
My hypothesis of who's best-positioned would actually be...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:59):
Today, my guest is Brian Balfour. Brian is the founder and CEO of Reforge, a company that I've been a long-time fan and advocate of. Historically, Reforge has focused primarily on teaching courses on product and growth, but more recently they've transitioned to building their own products, including a product called Reforge Insights and a bunch more really cool stuff coming very soon. 

(00:01:18):
Prior to Reforge, Brian led growth at HubSpot, and over the course of his career, he has seen the rise and fall of every major distribution channel, including Facebook's ad platform, Google Ads and SEO, and the Apple App Store. Based on what he's seeing, he is predicting the emergence of a brand new and powerful distribution channel that will likely arise in the next six months, centered most likely around ChatGPT. It is really rare for a new growth channel to open up. It's been a long time since the last one appeared, and the people who recognize this and hop on it early are the ones that reap the most rewards. So this is a huge deal. 

(00:01:54):
In this conversation, Brian shares what he's predicting, what he's seeing, why this is a big deal, and what you should be doing about it right now. I highly recommend you listen to this full conversation and discuss the ramifications with your team. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a bunch of incredible products for free for one year, including Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD, and Mobbin. Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com and click Product Pass. With that, I bring you Brian Balfour.

(00:02:32):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX, the developer intelligence platform designed by leading researchers. To thrive in the AI era, organizations need to adapt quickly, but many organization leaders struggle to answer pressing questions like which tools are working? How are they being used? What's actually driving value? DX provides the data and insights that leaders need to navigate this shift. With DX, companies like Dropbox, Booking.com, Adyen, and Intercom get a deep understanding of how AI is providing value to their developers and what impact AI is having on engineering productivity. To learn more, visit DX's website at getdx.com/lenny. That's getdx.com/lenny.

(00:03:16):
This episode is brought to you by Basecamp. Basecamp is the famously straightforward project management system from 37signals. Most project management systems are either inadequate or frustratingly complex, but Basecamp is refreshingly clear. It's simple to get started, easy to organize, and Basecamp's visual tools help you see exactly what everyone is working on and how all work is progressing. Keep all your files and conversations about projects directly connected to the projects themselves so that you always know where stuff is and you're not constantly switching contexts. Running a business is hard. Managing your project should be easy. I've been a long-time fan of what 37signals has been up to and I'm really excited to be sharing this with you. Sign up for a free account at basecamp.com/lenny. Get somewhere with Basecamp. Brian, thank you so much for being here and welcome back to the podcast. 

Brian Balfour (00:04:09):
Yeah, thanks for having me. Excited for this one. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:12):
I'm really excited to have you back. We're just going to dive right in. Essentially, you've uncovered a really important trend or insight about how products are going to grow differently in the future, how growth is changing, and this is something that I think a lot of people need to hear, so I asked you to come on to share what you're seeing. I also think this is just very timely. I think you said you're going to say in the next six months things might significantly change, so I'm really excited to do this. We're going to spend this whole conversation on this insight. To set us up, what is just the big idea? What's the high-level idea here? 

Brian Balfour (00:04:45):
Just like you, I've spent my whole career just really passionate about startups, figuring out how to build products that win, that emerge in new markets, and one of the things that I have learned over time or one of the things you hear a lot from a lot of folks is, to win, you have to really build a great product. A lot of advice boils down to that. And one of the things that I feel like I've banged my head against the wall in a lot of ways in my career is actually telling people that building a great product is one of those things that's necessary, but not sufficient, and actually the separation is between those that build really great distribution. 

(00:05:26):
So this general partner, his name's Alex Rampell, he's at Andreessen Horowitz, actually wrote this blog post 10 years ago back in I think 2015. In the essence of the blog post, he basically says one thing, which is that startups is a game of trying to get distribution before the incumbent can copy. It's this kind of concept of escape philosophy. 

(00:05:54):
On that note, which I think os a very good summary of what you're trying to do in a startup and distribution, is that we're right now living in this environment where that game of startups getting distribution faster than the incumbent has gotten way harder in a lot of ways, and in some small cases has gotten a little bit easier. But if we think about this, the way that it's gotten harder and some of the things that probably a lot of founders or folks working on the growth side that probably feel is that, one is that incumbents can copy faster these days. That window that you have to get that escape velocity has actually shrunk. It's decreased. 

(00:06:34):
The second thing is that a lot of the organic distribution that we've had, especially over the past few years, has really shrunk as well. Everybody's talking about the decline of SEO and clicks declining, but you also see it in some other cases. A lot of these social platforms don't really let you send as much traffic to sites. LinkedIn just changed their algorithm, which has really dropped organic distribution. Obviously the Twitter-to-X, transition that happened, right? TikTok's almost always been like that.

(00:07:06):
And then the third way that it's gotten harder is that AI's really good at writing software and code generation, and so everybody's feeling this infinite increase of competition, especially at the startup level. YC is pumping out six of the same thing every single cohort. That's what it literally feels like. 

(00:07:23):
So it's gotten way harder. This game, this escape velocity game has gotten a lot harder. It's gotten easier in some very exceptional cases like the Cursor or something where AI has been like the spark. I know you wrote the blog post about the race car engine, and I think you said there's the spark plug in the engine. AI really created that, a new type of spark, a new type of interest of early adopters to fuel some new players in a short period of time. So it's amazing to see something like Cursor overtake market share of something like GitHub Copilot in nine months or less. That's how fast it happens. It's kind of crazy. 

(00:08:01):
But the main thing that people need to understand is, okay, well, if that's the game I'm playing, how to get to escape velocity before the incumbent? What are all the ways to do that and to really figure that out? There's multiple ways that this can happen, but one of the major ways, one of the major, major ways that we always see is that this can happen when new distribution platforms emerge, because when new distribution platforms emerge, startups are usually the fastest to take advantage of them. It's slower for the incumbents to move. It gives startups this opportunity essentially to play this game. 

(00:08:39):
Casey Winters wrote this blog post about two years ago, maybe 18 months ago, about the AI technology shift. His key point was the AI technology shift has been a technology shift that has not come with a distribution shift yet. If you look historically, we've had a bunch of technology shifts from the internet to the cloud to mobile to social, all of these different types of things. Some of them come with new distribution platforms, new ways to distribute products, and some of them don't, but the most powerful ones, the most impactful ones are the ones that do come with these new distribution platforms. His second key point was that these two things don't actually happen at once. Usually you get the technology shift, then you get the distribution shift a little bit later. 

(00:09:25):
Now we're a couple years from that post. We are a couple years into AI technology shift, and one of the things that I am seeing is all of the conditions, all of the ingredients for a new distribution platform to emerge are essentially happening. So I think we're at an inflection point where we're going to see this emerge really fast. 

(00:09:45):
The key thing for everybody to know is that as new distribution platforms emerge, they follow the same four-step cycle and it's a game that you're playing, that everybody's playing. Just like any game, you need to know the rules of the game. You need to know the steps of the game in order to have any sort of opportunity to win. That's the thing that I've lived through once again, both painfully and also in good ways, and is something that I'm keeping my eye on and something that I've been talking about. Before we go into that four-step cycle, I figured I'll pause there to see if you have any follow-up questions on that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:24):
Okay. This is amazing. Essentially what you're saying is we follow these ways to grow, there's SEO, there's paid growth, there's sales. All these channels have been around for a long time. They're extremely saturated. Everyone's always complaining SEO's dead, it can't grow, the SEO, anymore. It can't grow. Word of mouth is so hard, there's so many amazing things now that's hard. Paid is so hard. It's just all this money just-

Brian Balfour (00:10:24):
Tax are rising.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:24):
Exactly.

Brian Balfour (00:10:49):
All these things. Yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:50):
So all these saturated channels, and what you're saying is there's an emerging new channel that has not yet been saturated, and this is a huge opportunity for companies to get on it. And you'll talk about timing because it's a little tricky to even know exactly when to go big on this.

Brian Balfour (00:11:05):
That's right. Yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:06):
But that's a huge deal. This has been a long time since there's a new way to grow that you can actually use as a lever for growth and not just hope for the best. Okay.

Brian Balfour (00:11:15):
Yeah. That's right. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:15):
Before you get into the cycles, do you want to tease what the answer is, just to give people a little hint, or do you want to keep it secret?

Brian Balfour (00:11:23):
Well, to be clear, okay, so my prediction, we don't have a clear winner yet. My prediction of the new distribution platform will be ChatGPT, in some ways that people probably already think it's happening in some ways that it won't, but the thing that is less important or that is more important than whether I have predicted the exact winner correctly, the thing that's more important is to understand the cycle and evaluate how to determine where you want to place your bets and how to place those bets, which I know we'll talk about.

(00:12:02):
I could be wrong about the ChatGPT prediction and what's going to happen there. I think there's going to be two parts of it. There's going to be what they do with a ChatGPT search experience, but I think the bigger thing will be whatever they do with launching a third-party platform on top of ChatGPT, there's a bunch of signals that they're about to launch that, I'm pretty sure it's going to be ChatGPT. 

(00:12:25):
The thing I'm way more sure about is that some new distribution platform will emerge and it will follow the same four-step cycle. That's the key. Could be wrong on the first piece, I am very confident on the second piece.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:40):
Okay. Excellent foreshadowing. I completely agree, if it's anything, it would be ChatGPT at this point. Let's get into it. What are the cycles that platforms generally follow? 

Brian Balfour (00:12:49):
Yeah, and I'll give some examples of this, but let me explain the four steps of the cycle first and then we'll go through a bunch of examples of all those individual steps. The four steps are essentially, one is I call a Step Zero. It's the conditions of the market have been met. Step One is about a moat, Step Two is about a platform opening, and Step Three is about the platform closing for control and monetization. Let me briefly explain each one. 

(00:13:20):
Step Zero is about the competitive market being met, the conditions being met, and there's a few part piece of this. One is that typically what happens is that there is consensus that there is going to be this new huge category. Think social, think mobile, like all those types of things. In this case, these AI like chat platforms, like a ChatGPT or a clock. There's consensus about that, but there's no clear winner yet. We typically have somewhere between five to seven major players really battling it out and they're all looking for what is the edge? What is the thing that is going to help me win? Because all of these dynamics, in all the history, they either end up in monopolies or duopolies, and so the stakes are really large and so the competition is fierce. 

(00:14:13):
That's Step Zero. I think we could all agree that we are in that mode right now. We've got OpenAI battling with Claude, battling with Gemini, and Google with whatever Meta comes out with their new team, so on and so forth. There's huge amounts of capital, there's consensus, all the types. They are in a fierce composition. That's Step Zero.

(00:14:36):
Step One is then these players, somebody essentially identifies whatever the moat is, the thing that is going to help build them defensibility and help them hit escape velocity and become that monopoly or duopoly in that single category. Once they figure out what that moat is, then they need to press the advantage. They need to figure out how to gather that moat as fast as humanly possible. It tends to be that you can't do that by yourself, so you need the help of an ecosystem in order to gather more of that moat. 

(00:15:12):
That typically comes down to third-party content creators or app developers and other businesses. So they all establish a third-party platform that has some incentives built in, and usually the value exchange is, hey, you develop on top of my platform, you add more use cases, more engagement, all of these things to my platform, and in exchange, I'm going to give you something in return. Usually that thing that's in exchange is, I'm going to give you some new form of distribution for your application and for your business.

(00:15:48):
But what essentially happens over time is that we go into Step Three, which is the closing period, which is at some point, all of these companies end up starting to lock down the platform. This tends to happen for reasons of monetization and growth. They either competitively don't want somebody to use their own platform to disrupt themselves. We saw that in the early Twitter days with things like Vine and Periscope, shutting those things down unceremoniously, or they need to find ways to monetize at a deeper and deeper level because all these companies, they have to grow. 

(00:16:32):
Google's the classic example here of just more and more real estate has either been taken up by either ads or their own first-party applications. That's the key is they close it down by doing by one of a few things. They either shut it down entirely, two, they develop their own first-party applications to absorb the highest use cases, or three, they artificially depress the organic distribution that they gave you in the step prior to push you towards paid mechanisms in order to monetize. I think we should go through multiple examples here, but that's the core essence of the four steps. I'll pause there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:12):
Awesome. So it's essentially figure out what's going to make, create defensibility long-term with your moat, bring everyone in, "Hey, everyone, welcome to Facebook," everyone joins Facebook and then, okay, and all the developers build on Facebook to bring in more people on Facebook and then they're like, "Okay, now you got to pay. There's a toll," but you love this so much and you're so hooked to all your friends that you're here, you may as well stick around. 

Brian Balfour (00:17:35):
That's right. That's right. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:35):
Amazing. Okay, so yeah, a few examples would be great. 

Brian Balfour (00:17:38):
Yeah. You just hit on the first one. This is the first one that I always think about because this is where I learned about this cycle very early in my career. One of my first companies was during the Facebook platform boom, social gaming, all of those applications, and I lived the full cycle in a very short period. I lived the glory days and just the absolute horror days, and it was very painful, but this is exactly what happened. 

(00:18:06):
Let's go through the four steps. Step Zero. Facebook was in a brutal battle with MySpace, Friendster and a few others. People forget this. People forget that there was actually a bunch of competitors at that time, and in fact those competitors were bigger than Facebook. They had more users back in 2007 when Facebook launched their third-party platform. But one of the key things is that Facebook was very early to the insight about the direct network effects in that there's going to create real lock-in that the more friends, the more of the global network that was on there, the more that it was just going to feed and hit this escape velocity.

(00:18:44):
At the time they launched their platform, I think they were maybe one-fourth, one-fifth the size of something like MySpace or even Friendster, Orkut, these are some of the names at that time, but they opened up their third-party platform. What was the value exchange? They went to third-party developers and they said, "Okay, we've created this canvas," they used to call it the canvas, and they were like, "You can put anything in the canvas that you want: an app, a game, whatever. You can monetize in any way you want. We just want this sidebar real estate on the ads. That's what we're really interested in." There was this mad gold rush on that Facebook. 

(00:19:24):
Oh, sorry, the other part of that was, "Not only will you put it there, we're going to give you access to all of these notification channels and feed to get distribution for your application." That was the other piece of it. You had this mad rush of developers coming in and you had this huge social application, social gaming boom. People just grew incredibly virally very fast, but eventually, essentially what happened over time is they kept peeling back that value exchange. 

(00:19:52):
They first were like, "Ah, actually those dollars that you're making inside that canvas area, well, we want a percentage of that." So they changed that. And then they figured out their ad systems and then they started peeling back. They started suppressing access to all of the organic channels that they had. Eventually, they went all the way towards absorbing the highest use case into their own first-party platform, things like first-party applications, things like events, photos, all those types of things, and basically shut down the platform for dead. 

(00:20:30):
These companies that have basically built on top of this platform, the other thing is by the time they started closing all those things down, all those competitors that we talked about, they were so far ahead at that point because they had built off the back of all these developers coming, adding use cases, bringing more users onto the platform, identifying that moat. They were so far ahead, it didn't matter. It didn't matter what the other folks did at that point, and that's what really gives you confidence to start closing down. But there's so many other examples of this if we go through it. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:02):
Just before you give other examples, just something I'll highlight here. One is the moat they identified in theory was the friend graph, I imagine?

Brian Balfour (00:21:02):
Yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:10):
Just once we have all your friends, you're not going to want to go anywhere. I imagine it's also important to note, this is a natural thing that would happen if you build the thing and it grows and you're like, "Oh, maybe we should change strategy." I imagine not everyone even knows this is what will happen and they organically evolve their strategy, or do you think everyone's just like, "This is now going to be our plan, Step 1, 2, 3, 4?"

Brian Balfour (00:21:32):
I think a different version of that question is I think some people could sit here and interpret this as all these folks are evil. That's not what I'm saying. That's actually not what I'm saying. I want to be very clear on that, because I think this cycle happens because of competitive and capitalistic dynamics and pressures. It's the same environment that enables creating amazing new companies here in the US. 

(00:22:01):
And there's two sides of the coin. You go through this cycle because it's a competitive environment. You're trying to figure out how to beat competitors, and this is one of the strategies to beat competitors. But at some point you just have to continue growing. You have to grow those dollars. The market does not reward flat companies, if anybody's noticed. You have to keep growing, and so they have to keep finding ways to grow as well as prevent their own disruption. TThey can get so big and they can give access, so much access of distribution to new developers, they don't want to enable their own disruption as well as they need to keep growing. 

(00:22:38):
My guess is anybody who is sitting in their shoes owning their platform is going to follow the exact same playbook and the exact same reasoning. Look, sometimes it happens also because it actually is the best thing for the user. Facebook's channels did get super spammy and all of those things, and that was part of the reason they'd play this, but let's be honest, it wasn't the only reason. A lot of it was for these other reasons. I don't think it's evil. You just need to know how to play the game. That's competition, that's business. They're playing you, so you need to play them. That might be a little sadistic or something, but that is business. You're in a game of competition.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:23):
Essentially, the incentives are pointing you in this direction. Capitalism, they say capitalism works, and so it'll pull everyone in this direction even if maybe they want to avoid it. Let's do a couple more examples.

Brian Balfour (00:23:33):
Yeah, we'll go through them quick. I think everybody's probably... Google's an interesting one because it played out over a much longer period of time. Facebook happened over the course of about in five-ish years, something like that. Google did it very slowly over years, but same thing, early massive competition against Yahoo, I don't know, AltaVista, Lycos, you name them all. That was even before my time. They were first to really identify these data moats and incentivizing essentially web developers, content folks to optimize for their search algorithms, create this great distribution mechanism. Everybody's building content and everything for them, but over time, slowly but surely they did two things. 

(00:24:19):
One is more and more that real estate became ads that they were monetizing, so they're suppressing organic distribution in order to push people towards the ads, as well as absorbing a bunch of the highest value first-party use cases, things like travel as an example, or even restaurant search and all those types of things. The former Yelp CEO and founder has been out there saying a lot of things about these practices. So, same exact cycle.

(00:24:48):
Mobile went through the exact same cycle. iOS created a new distribution mechanism. They had a ton of competition among different phones when they first started on. They found the defensibility was more about the apps, the data and all the developers, created the App Store, all of these types of things, but over time, we've seen more and more restrictions there on that front. 

(00:25:09):
And then most recently, we've seen this happen in smaller places, too. LinkedIn, as an example, first went through this wave with company pages. They were like, "Ah, companies, come on, promote your company page. Bring in more users, all that type of stuff, and then get all these followers." And then of course you get almost no distribution now through your company page because they're pushing you towards ads. And then they recently just did this with personal profiles, too, which is they really boosted distribution for individuals to create content for that platform. They then introduced the thought leader ad format, a way to monetize those individual posts, and now you've seen them really pull back on that organic distribution. 

(00:25:52):
So this happens in big forms and it happens even in smaller use cases as well, but once again, the steps of the cycle are exactly the same. The key part about this, too, is that the broad trend is that the cycles seem to be getting shorter and shorter and shorter and shorter, so you actually have a smaller amount of time to play the game.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:11):
Okay, and the big a-ha here is, yes, this will end maybe not great for you, but there's this magical period when they're open to customers and users where you can grow like crazy because they want everyone to come and they give you a distribution. What you're saying essentially is ChatGPT, potentially some other platform, maybe is about to enter this moat.

Brian Balfour (00:26:35):
Yeah. Well, before we get to ChatGPT, I think the natural reaction when you first realize this is, "Screw them, I'm not playing that game." That's what I feel like most people, how they react. Because the unfortunate truth is that a lot of companies don't predict that last stage and end up in a really hard position. So many companies got completely killed during the crash of the Facebook social platform. Apple's 30% tax basically destroyed a bunch of types of applications and business models because you feel like it just wasn't margin-effective. So many companies built on SEO loops that are in serious, serious trouble right now if that's their only channel. So all these things. 

(00:27:33):
I think the natural reaction is, why would I play this game if I'm a startup or a company? You can even see this with ChatGPT, as an example. They just launched these deep research connectors. One of them was my former company, HubSpot. If you sat inside HubSpot and you were just thinking in isolation, you would be like, well, why would I want to make all of my data accessible through ChatGPT and have all of the usage you start to accrue there? That doesn't really make sense in isolation. But we don't operate in isolation. Once again, we operate in a competitive environment.

(00:28:11):
What's going to happen is that if you don't do it, your competitors are going to certainly go to the new platform and your customer expectations change, and you have to rise to those customers' expectations. They're going to start expecting you to be in these new experiences and all these things. It ends up being a prisoner's dilemma, which is, there is no opting out of the game. You have to play the game. So it's better to be early than to be super late to this game, especially, especially if you are a startup. That's the key opportunity. 

(00:28:51):
We will talk a little bit more about how to play the game more, but it's better to be early as well as, then the key, the harder part about it is anticipating that last stage of the cycle and figuring out how to sequence away from something before that last cycle comes. I think that's the key part, but let me pause there and then I'll talk a little bit about ChatGPT and some of my reasoning behind that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:12):
Cool. So what you're saying is not only is there going to be this big opportunity to grow, if you don't take advantage of it, somebody in your space will. It's not only there's an opportunity, but this is something you need to do because you might miss the boat. 

(00:29:26):
I think about companies like Zynga that grew on Facebook and then became massive companies. If they didn't do that, they would've missed the boat, someone else would've eaten that lunch. I don't know, I'm thinking about the Technology Bros podcast on Twitter right now, TBPN, where they basically figured out on Twitter you can create this livestream and you see it all day in your Twitter feed just like, hey, they're broadcasting, and it's a really cool distribution channel.

(00:29:49):
I think there's a big call to arms here almost of just the opportunities emerging and you basically need to pay attention. You can't opt out.

Brian Balfour (00:29:58):
That's right. That's right. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:58):
Awesome. 

Brian Balfour (00:29:58):
Exactly. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:00):
Okay, so let's talk ChatGPT.

Brian Balfour (00:30:02):
Look, let's go through this cycle. Right now we're in that competitive environment. Like we said, all those players we talked about, ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, all these folks, they are battling it out. We've seen this with the Talent Awards especially over the past month or so. There's no clear winner yet, but there's consensus around the category. 

(00:30:25):
The second thing is then, okay, what's the moat? Has the moat been identified? And who seems to have identified it the first or as furthest along? My hypothesis, and I think there's a lot more consensus around this now than there might've even been three months ago, is that the moat is about context and memory. These models by themselves, if you compare them side by side, they generate the same result, and so the actual difference-maker is which one has more of your context, because it's the context plus the model that produces the best output, and then that starts to accrue to this loop around memory. The more you use it, the more it's able to store a memory around you, which feeds more personalized context, which produces better outputs. It ends up being another one of those flywheels, another one of those loops. 

(00:31:16):
If you look at who's farthest on this, it definitely is ChatGPT. They were the first ones to memory. They've been investing a lot in these different types of data connectors, essentially context connectors, gathering all of this context, so you can really start to see it in the usage. 

(00:31:37):
The second thing is, and one of the pushbacks I've gotten on my prediction has been, well, what about Google and Gemini? They have so much distribution through Chrome and all of this other stuff. Deedy Das, who's a VC at Menlo Ventures, actually published some good data on retention of all of these different ones. 

(00:32:00):
I think the second reason I predict ChatGPT is if you look at history once again, it was never the person who had the biggest distribution at the moment of time. It was the one that had the best retention and engagement. Google had the best retention and engagement over the others. Facebook was smaller, but had way better retention and engagement over the others, so on and so forth. 

(00:32:22):
The data that Deedy published clearly show that both the retention curves, which I know you and I have both written about at exhaustion, level off at significant portions higher than all the other platforms, as well as those retention curves have been shifting up dramatically over time, you can start to see the effects of memory. They have the very elusive smile curve, the ones that you just like. I've seen all of those dynamics very few times in my career, and they tend to be the folks like Slack and all of the big winners. It's just so elusive

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:04):
The smile curve, just to people who don't know what that is, is essentially retention goes up over time, it goes down a little bit, and then you come back to it and you use it more.

Brian Balfour (00:33:12):
Yeah, that's right, and it's usually the result of some type of network of factor or something else, and it's an early indicator that that platform is on a trajectory to hit escape velocity. 

(00:33:27):
The third piece is that, and they haven't really hidden these, but there's all sorts of signals that they're about to launch a third-party platform. They've been hiring for a bunch of roles. I've seen multiple postings on product manager engineering roles, all that kind of stuff for, quote, unquote, "agent platform" and all those pieces. It feels pretty inevitable that one of these players will need to launch a third-party platform in order to serve all the possible use cases on these tools. There's going to be some value exchange, which is like, hey, for your agent to be effective, you probably need access to the context and memory and distribution, so there'll be some value which is, "Integrate to us and we'll give you those three things which is going to drive more users and more usage," and we're going to go through the steps of the cycle. 

(00:34:21):
You can already see this. They're starting to form preferred partnerships with some of the bigger players, which paves the way for smaller third-party players. It lends credibility to the platform. It's like, well, if HubSpot and XYZ are doing it, then I should probably do it, too. It's like that type of mentality. But that's why I think out of all of these platforms, ChatGPT has the best shot right now. 

(00:34:47):
And then, a bunch of folks are always like, "Well, what about Claude? I really like Claude. I use Claude." Well, the problem with that is I think ChatGPT at this point has at least a 10x difference on MAU. If you're a developer and you're comparing those two platforms and you're looking at it and you're like, "Well, ChatPT has 10x the number of users and better retention engagement," it's like, what's the logical choice of which one you're going to prioritize your scarce resources on? 

(00:35:20):
Those are just some of the reasons that my prediction is on ChatGPT. In the blog post that I wrote about this, I actually then played my own devil's advocate and said, "Okay, here are some reasons why it might not be ChatGPT," but I think we're in that part of the cycle. That's my prediction. I might be wrong in the prediction of ChatGPT, but I really think, I feel very confident we're going to see this cycle play out again.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:45):
Two follow-up questions here. One is, what would be the backup if it's not ChatGPT? It sounds like it might be Gemini or Google?

Brian Balfour (00:35:51):
My hypothesis of who's best-positioned but is not executing on it right now would actually be Apple-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:59):
Whoa.

Brian Balfour (00:35:59):
... because through the devices, they basically can see everything. They have the ultimate view into your context. They're sitting at that level But I don't know what they're doing. From an execution standpoint, maybe they're going to surprise us with something crazy magical, but we haven't seen any external signals around this. That's probably just based on what real estate and where people live in the stack would own. 

(00:36:34):
And then, I think right behind that, I would probably put Google because of owning the context of things like email and the distribution points of search and Chrome and Android and those types of pieces. A lot of people point to them, but my experience with all of their products, going back to the retention engagement thing, is that if we could take a look inside their metrics, I think what we would see is a bunch of fly-by users in their mouse. They're sprinkling the Gemini bucket everywhere. I've literally clicked on it accidentally multiple times. My guess is a huge portion of their mouse is exactly that of what's happening right now. Look, they just acquired a very talented team from Windsurf and from-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:30):
And just the team. Just the team, part of the team.

Brian Balfour (00:37:31):
Yeah. We'll see. Things are changing dramatically on a week-to-week basis, so we'll see if they're able to press those advantages in a very clear way. But I think the window is very small for them if ChatGPT plays their cards right, because they clearly have the escape velocity right now. If they just keep pressing that advantage in the right way, I think it's going to be very hard for Google to counter in the amount of time that's left

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:00):
On the Claude piece, I'll just throw this nugget out, I had Mike Krieger on the podcast, Head of Product, CPO, at Anthropic, and asked him just, "You're losing to ChatGPT. How do you approach the future of Claude?" He very specifically said, "Yes, they've caught lightning in a bottle. This is just going to win based on what I've seen at Instagram. So we are specifically focusing on what is Anthropic and Claude incredibly good at, which is developer tools, coding, backend stuff." So they're actually leaning more and more into that. If you've seen the revenue recently, they're making, I don't know, approaching 10 billion a year or some crazy amount of money. They're actually doing super well, just in a different use case.

Brian Balfour (00:38:40):
I'm glad you mentioned this because this brings up something that we skipped, which is, there are smaller platforms that have existed and will also emerge in this environment as well, and that's what you're alluding to. This tends to happen is things end up growing into more niches. Even if you look at social, like LinkedIn emerged as a subset of the social world, but even on these smaller platforms, these new distribution channels, they go through the same cycle. 

(00:39:12):
I'll give something, really a very opposite example of the ones that I gave. Look at the platform Udemy. They are a platform for course creators. I don't know if most people know this, but when they started, their rev share to creators was something like 80% to creators. They started very high. That brought on all the course creators, got their whole marketplace going, so on and so forth. I believe it was about a year ago they announced that they're essentially pushing that rev share down to somewhere between 15 and 20%. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:48):
Wow.

Brian Balfour (00:39:48):
They're somewhere at 25 and 30%. Another example of they close down organic distribution in order to monetize, all that kind of stuff. The same thing will happen in this AI world. Cursor, it's very clear Cursor's on the path to also probably create some type of agent platform for developers. That'll be a smaller ecosystem to play in for some products. It feels like everybody has the same strategy at this point is everybody wants to launch an agent platform. I imagine some of these other horizontal productivity tools will do the same thing, maybe like a Notion or an Airtable or a Monday.com or something like that. 

(00:40:31):
There will be smaller platforms that will emerge, and they will follow the exact same cycle that I'm also discussing, but in terms of the biggest consumer one, that's where I think ChatGPT has probably the most escape velocity and others will focus on different areas. Just to be clear, I love Claude. I actually use both Claude and ChatGPT-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:58):
Same.

Brian Balfour (00:40:59):
... for different things. I have lots of love to go around for all these tools. My prediction has no bearing on which product I like the most right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:07):
Also love Claude. So the key point here you're making is that there's almost a number of distribution channels emerging. Many of them will be niche. I think of LinkedIn. LinkedIn for me has a very targeted audience, for folks that listen to this podcast. Even though it's not, I don't know, Google or Facebook or whatever, it's still incredibly valuable for this specific thing that I do.

Brian Balfour (00:41:30):
For sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:31):
I think this is even more interesting that there's going to be a number of distribution channels that emerge out of this whole AI wave. 

(00:41:37):
The other thing I'll note real quick, you mentioned this idea of everyone's building agents. I just had Brett Taylor on the podcast who's building Sierra, and he made me realize why everyone's building agents partly. One is because the outcome-based pricing that you can charge with agents is incredible because, one, you can actually attribute their impact on your business's ROI. You can actually see this is saving an agent $15 because it solved the case. And it's attributable and it's autonomous. It's just doing it on its own. With that, you can charge per outcome. You can say, "We'll charge you a dollar," every time it solves an issue. So the monetization opportunity is huge and the margins go up like crazy.

Brian Balfour (00:42:19):
Can I just ask a question about that?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:21):
Yeah. 

Brian Balfour (00:42:22):
Do you think that has longevity in the sense that... That makes sense in the current environment that we're sitting in right now because people are comparing these outcomes relative to what it costs them today with pure humans. But once again, competition comes in at some point, and so that feels like that creates a pretty ripe opportunity to undercut and come into... and then you have the disruption theory playing out as well. It obviously depends on the infrastructure costs and compute costs to run these things, but I just wonder how much of that is temporary versus something that'll be long-term.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:07):
So you're saying that dollar will come down to 50 cents, 25 cents, or you're saying someone's going to come with a whole new business model and disrupt that whole approach?

Brian Balfour (00:43:15):
More the first, yeah. It's just competition erodes that away, essentially, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:19):
Yeah, that's a good point. So margins will be higher for a while, and then they'll come down.

Brian Balfour (00:43:24):
Unless there's something else that creates a durable pricing power, right? 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:31):
Yeah. 

Brian Balfour (00:43:34):
That's probably the second piece of this. Yeah, that's probably the second piece of that hypothesis, I feel like. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:38):
Yeah. I guess the opportunity there, the moat would be the data, similar to how Cursor is collecting more feedback on what people want in their code suggestions, maybe in theory CRF and has more and more data over time, and there's this network effect-

Brian Balfour (00:43:53):
Yeah. That's right. Let me revise that. I believe in that as long as it's paired with-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:59):
Some moat?

Brian Balfour (00:44:00):
... this second piece. Otherwise, it gets competed away.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:03):
Good tangent. Okay, one more question. What is your prediction on timeline for when the opportunity appears, and what do you predict, as of the day we're recording, what do you predict will be the next couple things that ChatGPT, and let's just focus on that, releases to start to open up this platform to get everyone in there?

Brian Balfour (00:44:26):
Well, look, I'll first give the disclaimer that I feel like any thoughts on timing in the AI market have been very hard to predict. It's always shorter. That's where we should buy us. It's always shorter than you think of when something's going to happen. That's what it's felt like from the seat that I've been sitting in. But my guess is this: we're going to see the next major steps of this play out over the next six months. 

(00:44:57):
I think we just saw one of the pieces drop around this, which was, ChatGPT's recently launched Agent mode. It's kind of a general-purpose agent, and I think that starts to introduce all of the users to using agents and they're figuring out and placing it in the different tiers and business models, all of those pieces. But it's likely that no general-purpose agent is going to fulfill all of the infinite use cases successfully. There's two reasons for this.

(00:45:30):
Users struggle with horizontal tools. They can do everything, and that's exactly why they struggle to adopt, and so they typically need more specific entry points. But also, the more specific use case you get, sometimes you need specific UI, specific data, other specific ingredients to properly fulfill that use case for a given audience. I think their Agent mode was a step in this direction. 

(00:45:56):
What I would expect to see play out next is that they will either launch, they will announce the platform with preferred partners, or what they're going to announce first is basically a set of preferred partners, the guinea pigs, an initial 10 to 20 folks that are bringing agents to their platform. What that does is essentially, once again, it's a credibility card. You do special deals with some brand names to give the platform credibility, and it creates this desire from everybody else to come on to the platform.

(00:46:37):
And then the step after that is starting to opening up the platform. This is where we'll really start to figure out what this game is going to look like because they basically have to define what the value exchange is. What are they giving you access to, and what are they incentivizing you with to come onto the platform? That's one version of it.

(00:46:58):
The other version of it is just the replacement to search. You can also see them starting to make more moves here, which is deeper attribution in some of the results, those types of pieces. They're bringing in shopping. That's one of their recent announcements as well, native into the UI. Essentially they will form new monetization mechanisms around that stuff as well. That's actually going to be very important because, going back to the moat around memory and context is that they will want to incentivize as many people to their free tier as possible, but given the cost of AI, they have to cover it somehow, so they're going to need some monetization mechanisms. The more that they can cover that free usage with things that aren't subscriptions, I think that probably also feeds the moat.

(00:47:51):
I think those are some of the next steps on two different vectors, more of a third-party developer platform and more of the content, whatever you want to call it, AEO, GEO. I don't know what acronym is we've all decided on yet. Let me know if we have. I think those will be the next steps that we'll see. 

(00:48:13):
Now, that's what I think for ChatGPT. I think the thing that we should talk about is, essentially what I would advise folks, especially startups, is you're placing bets. At this part of the cycle, you're placing bets. The winner is 100% guaranteed, as I mentioned, and so you essentially at some point will need to make some decisions about where to place your bets.

(00:48:37):
In the Facebook days, all those other social networks, they also came out with their own platforms. iOS had Android and some failed initiatives from Windows. I don't even remember what that platform was called. You can look back and whoever placed through... the iPhone was actually a very, and iOS is a good one, which is, if you had only aligned your bets to Android, you probably lost. If you somehow found a way to play on both ecosystems, you could be a winner. But if you only aligned to iOS, you could also be a winner. You had to have iOS as part of your betting strategy in order to win. 

(00:49:21):
Everybody right now, you're probably at this cycle and you're trying to figure out, well, everybody will need to figure out where are they going to place their chips. How are they going to bet? Depending on how you bet really depends on what your current position is in the marketplace. If you're a late-stage startup, let's start with that, or a late-stage company, you can afford the luxury to place multiple bets and spread your chips and wait it out a little bit to see who the winner is, and then really throw your muscle behind that winner. You have that luxury a little bit. But the risk of that, the risk of that is that sometimes the incumbents wait too long to make that decision, and that's the key question they will need to answer. 

(00:50:08):
The key question for startups is totally different. You don't have the luxury to spread your chips. You have to go all in. You have to choose one and go all in. You have scarce resources, scarce attention from the market. It's a totally different ballgame. Higher risk, higher reward, for sure. That's part of the betting strategy for startups. That's what you have to do is you have to figure out your betting strategy, and then we can talk a little bit about how you might evaluate and pick the right course for you. That's where we're all at right now is we just entered the casino, we just put some cash in for some chips, and now we've got to figure out what tables and where to place those chips.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:56):
I love this analogy. Just to be crystal clear about what listeners should do, what founders should do, what product teams should do, the advice here essentially is integrate with ChatGPT, maybe Gemini, maybe if Apple has something, actually integrate with what they launch. It could be a login thing, could be a search thing, could be a connect and suck up your memory in context. The advice here is you need to do this because this is potentially the way that most companies will start to grow and your competitors may overtake you.

Brian Balfour (00:51:30):
Yeah. If we had to really simplify it, it's essentially, play the game. Don't opt out of the game. Don't trick yourself into thinking that you can't play the game. That's number one. Number two, no matter who you bet on, just make it a focused bet. Because if you look back, all the failures are the ones that tried to play multiple games at once with scarce resources, and that just tends to never work if you're an early-stage startup. So those two things: play the game, put a focused bet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:03):
This episode is brought to you by Miro. Every day, new headlines are scaring us about all the ways that AI is coming for our jobs, creating a lot of anxiety and fear, but a recent survey from Miro tells a different story. 76% of people believe that AI can benefit the role, but over 50% of people struggle to know when to use it. Enter Miro's Innovation Workspace, an intelligent platform that brings people and AI together in a shared space to get great work done. 

(00:52:29):
Miro has been empowering teams to transform bold ideas into the next big thing for over a decade. Today, they're at the forefront of bringing products to market even faster by unleashing the combined power of AI and human potential. Guests of this podcast often share Miro templates. I use it all the time to brainstorm ideas with my team. Teams especially can work with Miro AI to turn the unstructured data, like sticky notes or screenshots, into usable diagrams, product briefs, data tables, and prototypes in minutes.

(00:52:58):
You don't have to be an AI master or to toggle yet another tool. The work you're already doing in Miro's canvas is the prompt. Help your teams get great work done with Miro. Check it out at miro.com/lenny. That's M-I-R-O dot com slash Lenny. 

(00:53:14):
So you were Head of Growth at HubSpot for a long time, and you gave that as an example, HubSpot, why would they integrate, why would they give away all their data so that ChatGPT can suck it up, and you never have to go to HubSpot, you're just working through their agent. Would you at HubSpot be like, "Yes, we got to do this. This is the game we got to play"?

Brian Balfour (00:53:31):
Yeah, 100%, and that's exactly what I think you see them doing. Look, to be very clear, I have not talked to anybody at HubSpot about this. I have not talked to Dharmesh about this, but Dharmesh I think has also published about this. The right thing to do is, essentially, even though you understand how the cycle plays out and you don't necessarily understand what your exit strategy is once you get out, it's better to be early, know that you need to figure out an exit strategy and figure out that exit strategy along the way versus waiting and then being super late and then know what the exit strategy is. 

(00:54:15):
I think that's exactly what you see them doing. They're trying to be as early to this stuff as possible. I think it's a pretty smart play, even though we might not necessarily see what the exit strategy is out of this cycle for them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:34):
Going back to that amazing quote that you shared at the beginning of the conversation by, I think it was Alex Rampell?

Brian Balfour (00:54:40):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:40):
Of that startups win by finding a distribution channel before the incumbent copies them. What you're saying here is this is the opportunity for startups to disrupt an incumbent. This is the opportunity for someone to disrupt Salesforce, I don't know, ServiceNow, all these guys that have been around for a long time.

Brian Balfour (00:54:59):
Yeah, it's going to be one of the major ones. Now look, you've already seen players that have been able to hit this escape velocity, the Cursors and stuff of the world. Once again, there's multiple ways to hit that escape velocity, but this is one of the major ways to do it is to basically hitch yourself to a new platform. Look, you did it yourself, actually. You hitched yourself to Substack super early. You took a focused bet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:27):
I was going to say that. 

Brian Balfour (00:55:28):
Yeah, yeah. I don't know why that just hit me, but you took a focused bet and you've benefited from it in a disproportional way than those that came later. I think that's actually a great meta example here as I sit here and think about this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:44):
Yeah, that's actually the way I thought about when I was moving to Substack. I feel like there's this wave rising and I want to ride this wave, even if maybe it's not the best place or they take a cut, all that stuff. But it worked out really well. 

Brian Balfour (00:55:55):
That's right. I think it worked out very well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:58):
It worked out really well. To be honest, it felt like it was too late when I started six years ago.

Brian Balfour (00:55:58):
It felt too late?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:05):
Yes.

Brian Balfour (00:56:06):
Oh, say more about that. 

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:07):
It always feels too late, I think, to people that join... Silicon Valley, or sorry, Marc Andreessen has this famous quote. He's like, "I came to Silicon Valley in the '80s. I thought it was over, I was too late. I missed all the opportunities." That's fair. There was just a lot of newsletters. They were doing really well. Millions of subscribers. I'm like...

Brian Balfour (00:56:24):
And what do you say to people now who want to join Substack?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:27):
"Learn from this example." A lot of times when people think that it's too late, it's definitely not too late, and it's always only just getting started. Especially if you're on Twitter all day listening to podcasts like this where we're surrounded with this bubble of everyone talking about something, when in reality, 1% of people know anything about what you're hearing about every day.

Brian Balfour (00:56:45):
Yeah. Yeah, that's so interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:47):
Okay, so coming back to the advice, say someone is sitting there and talking to their manager like, "Brian just shared all this mind-blowing advice. We got to pick our battles, we got to pick our platform," what would your advice be for them to decide where to place their bets?

Brian Balfour (00:57:06):
I think this is a great question because, once again, put my personal prediction aside for a second, and I would encourage everybody to think about it from first principles from who their audience is, what their product is, what stage of company they're at, their current strengths and weaknesses, you got to take all this into account, but if I had to boil it down to a few criteria, the main things I would think about is, when you're looking at new distribution channels and new platforms to choose on, one, going back to what we said before is the better signal is retention and depth of engagement of the users on this platform than it is pure user level like MAU or some other number of signups, one of those vanity metrics. Look at that number one. 

(00:57:51):
Number two is, there's some element of user quality and ability to monetize the users on this platform. I think the starkest example here would be iOS and Android. Even today it's something like Android has 70-some percent of devices, but only 30% of the market share by dollars, and it's the exact flip for iOS. It goes back to what we were talking about earlier, which was, if you bet on Android only, you probably lost, but if you bet on iOS only, even though smaller user base, you were still able to parlay that into a win later. 

(00:58:31):
The third thing to look at is, as these platforms emerge, just analyze what the value exchange is. What are they giving you to incentivize you to develop on their platform? All these platforms, it's a bit of a game of whoever understands the rules and how to arbitrage the rules the best tend to be the ones with the edge and figure that out.

(00:58:58):
And then finally, fourth on my criteria would be pure scale. Obviously, even if you have those other three, but there's a 200x difference in scale and momentum, obviously you probably have to choose the bigger platform. 

(00:59:20):
But last but not least is as you go through these criteria, these are how you think through entering the game. Once you enter the game, then you immediately need to move to starting to think about how do you exit the game. Knowing once again that that last step is going to come at some point in the future, that there's going to be some closure for monetization, then that's where you have to start thinking through your strategy to exit. 

(00:59:47):
That comes down to things like, okay, well how are you going to own an important part of the user experience or workflow? Or how are you going to accumulate specialized data in context that the major platforms don't have? Or how do you create different types of micro network effects? All of these types of things. So just once again, there is the entrance criteria, but once you figure that out and you feel like you're in the game, you immediately need to move towards, okay, what's my exit plan here, knowing this is all coming.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:22):
It's interesting that another way to think about this model you've described as building, the strategy of building on top of LLMs and becoming a GPT wrapper. Because essentially this tech allows you to, say, create a cursor that is incredible, and then you could argue, oh, you're just going to be this wrapper, and they're getting all the money here, everyone can copy you. What's your defensibility long-term? The answer is, what is the moat you will build over time sitting on top of this thing that will make you more and more valuable on term and not have to rely on this thing? It feels like you could use the same framework for building a GPT wrapper business, to use that euphemism.

Brian Balfour (01:01:02):
Yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:04):
Say someone is sitting there today. Is there anything they can do to start making a bet? Is it simply creating an MCP that allows LLMs to suck in your data? Is that the one thing you could do today? Is there anything else that's available today to start using these platforms, or is it just a little too early and they haven't released the good stuff yet? 

Brian Balfour (01:01:25):
It might be just a tad too early. We're right on that edge. Some of the questions I'm asking myself is, I'm going through all of these players and where our customers and target audience live, and I'm asking myself the question, okay, if this player launched some type of platform, how would we evaluate it? So on and so forth. 

(01:01:51):
You can also try to cozy up to these folks. I would place a large portion of my net worth right now that if we could sit in the OpenAI offices at that front desk, that they are having meetings with potential preferred developers talking about this, we could probably sit there and log it. I do think some people are going to be in a place to develop preferred relationships and make a note. If you're in that spot, then you should definitely play that card. A lot of early-stage startups will be in that place.

(01:02:30):
Other than that, I would say, once they launch these platforms, you can't do much else, so you really know what the value exchange is and what they're going to expose for you, but also just be prepared to turn your strategy on a dime and go all in. I think that's probably one of the hardest parts of this is that these things emerge and you have to capitalize extremely quickly. A lot of times, it's hard for leaders to do that because they don't want to create a feeling of whiplash into the unknown, and we've got all these projects in play. You know all the things. I think that's probably the last part of what we can be doing right now versus just staying on top of everything as it emerges.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:14):
As you were talking, this reminded me, I recently noticed that ChatGPT is driving me to my newsletter more traffic than Twitter, and I feel like that recently shifted. I didn't even know this was a thing until I just started looking through my referrals. I'm like, "ChatGPT? What the hell is going on there?" It's like a different version of what you're talking about, but essentially, in theory I could block ChatGPT from... I don't know. I don't even know if I can from... including all my stuff. 

Brian Balfour (01:03:39):
You can in Substack now, yeah. I just saw that setting in there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:42):
Okay. Oh, interesting. That's the similar kind of decision is, is it better for me for it to be recommending my stuff and telling people, "Hey, go check this thing out," or is it better to block it off? I think, per your point, and this is the way I felt, take it all. It's good. In that, it's better that it's from Lenny's newsletter than something else. So someone else will come in and eat that market share.

Brian Balfour (01:04:06):
Yeah, that's right. If you don't do it, somebody else is. I think that's also what all the major media publishers are really contending with right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:18):
I guess I need a licensing deal with New York check. Anyway. Okay. I want to go on a totally different tangent. We weren't planning to talk about this. I know that I said this, we're going to be fully focused on this one topic, but there's something you mentioned to me before we start recording that I think will be really interesting to a lot of people. 

(01:04:34):
You guys at Reforge are now building actual SaaS products that people can buy. It's not just courses. I don't know if people know that, but let's make sure people understand this. There's actually products for product teams, so maybe just explain that briefly, but the thing that I think is really interesting here is you work with a lot of companies now selling them AI tools, and you have noticed a very big difference between the companies that are really good at adopting AI tools and seeing gains from them from those that don't. Talk about just what you see there, and because this is in theory going to be really helpful to companies that are struggling with adopting AI tools and seeing gains.

Brian Balfour (01:05:09):
Just to quickly explain that transition so it makes sense for people, which is, I started Reforge just with the interest that there was all these incredible leaders out there growing on the front lines of some of the fastest growing companies and they have all this amazing knowledge and I wanted to encode it in useful and practical ways for others. That took the form of courses and content and product, all that kind of stuff at the beginning. Along the way, everybody kept asking us to essentially build the tools to implement what we taught. Because with anything, you can learn as much as you want. You can listen to my podcast, your podcast, Lenny, whatever, as much as you want, but if you don't actually put it into action and implement it, then it's not really going to create value. 

(01:05:56):
People kept asking us to really close that gap and we said no for the longest time. And then about a couple of years ago when AI really started to inflect, it really created this moment that, oh, wow, now there's this opportunity not just to encode this knowledge into content, but also into the products, the software, the tools that we use ourselves. So we started to take a really big bet on that and started to develop this new platform for AI-native product teams. 

(01:06:22):
The first product we launched is called Reforge Insights, which acts like your AI product researcher, aggregates all the feedback from all the sources, uses AI to analyze it, helps you explore it, but also will start to identify what are the gaps, the things that you don't have in your feedback today and auto-generate the research to go gather all those new insights, so complete the full cycle. We're going to launch two other major products as part of this platform before the end of the year, but we'll save that for some future episode. 

(01:06:53):
So that's been our journey. We've seen inside companies that are going through this transformation from two perspectives. One is obviously selling in that tools, but the other perspective is, for 10 years, companies have been coming to us to help them try some sort of transformation with our learning product.

(01:07:15):
Most companies are not coming to us to just throw a bunch of courses in front of, they're trying to solve some big business problem, some transformation. Now that used to be things like, we've got to figure out this growth thing, or I'm going from sales-led to product-led, or I have more project managers and I need to transition to product managers, something like that. There's some business problem, they're going through some transformation and they saw us as part of that transformation and we got to partake in quite a few of those types of transformation.

(01:07:50):
Now of course, the transformation that everybody's going through is, okay, how do I become more AI-native? How do I adopt this stuff? We've seen a pretty wide spectrum and from both perspectives of how companies are approaching this. I'm sure everybody's seen that AI, we've been calling them the AI manifesto memos from CEOs out there that proclaim, "We are now AI-native," in some grandiose way, but behind the scenes, there's actually some incredibly stark differences in the actual teeth of what backs up those memos and backs up those executive decrees that we should all be AI.

(01:08:43):
Just to point out a few of them, which is, one is that I think the most impactful thing that you can do is form really hard constraints. There's other parts that's like, okay, you want to communicate this, you want to establish an owner of who's going to drive this, you want to build an incentives and rewards, and you see this all playing out in things like building it into your career ladders, or some people are starting to introduce this as questions into their performance reviews, all those types of pieces. But the thing that is actually moving the needle are the companies that are defining incredibly hard constraints. 

(01:09:30):
One company that we worked with developed this constraint that they benchmarked against other companies of their revenue size and the team sizes for those stages, and they set a benchmark that we will be one-fifth, each of our functions will be one-fifth the size. What that did is it created a constraint that you couldn't hire above that level, and it forced people to essentially find ways to adopt AI and do things to replace that. So that was one. 

(01:10:01):
You've seen these other ones, I can't remember from what company, that might've been Shopify or another, who was like, you are not allowed new headcount until you prove to us that you are not able to accomplish this with AI. That's another hard constraint. But you also see these other constraints on a smaller level, which is executives saying, "I will not do a product review or review a PRD unless it comes with three prototypes." Something like that. That's the hardest one. Those are the biggest constraints.

(01:10:33):
I think the biggest change that I'm seeing is, and the things that separates out the top few percent making this change and everybody else is essentially making the hardest decisions, and that hardest decision is going to come down to exiting people. In every transformation, what we see is essentially three groups of folks. We call them the catalysts, the people leading the charge, the people who are experimenting, doing this on their own time, all that kind of stuff. 

(01:11:07):
You then have what we call your converts. These are folks that will make the transformation, they will adapt, but they need structure, they need permission, they need a clear outline, they need a clear plan. I don't say this in a negative way, it's just that that's how some people operate. That's where things like all the things that we were talking about before, which was the decree, the permission, the clear budgets, the rewards, all of those types of things. 

(01:11:37):
But then, inevitably you have a certain percentage that are anchors. They're dragging their feet, they're silently creating friction in the background and all those pieces. There's a big difference in how I think companies are treating and thinking about their strategy for those folks. One group is like, ah, we're going to work with them very passively. Others have set a hard deadline. They're either going to make the transformation by X date or we're going to exit folks. 

(01:12:13):
A lot of people look at this as being really harsh. I think a lot of people would think that, especially individuals, but let me explain it from more of a CEO perspective. A lot of these companies are seeing this AI transformation, the ones that are taking it more seriously, as this isn't adopting new tools, this isn't a light change. This is a fundamental culture change of how we operate as a company. You can't have 20, 30%, whatever meaningful number of it is of your company trying to operate in a completely different way, in a completely different culture.

(01:12:48):
Cultures thrive on density, and that's why there's sometimes the best ones feel like cults. As a result, from that perspective, it's like, hey, for us to be successful, for this to be the best thing for all employees, we all need to be operating around the same culture of principles and stuff. If that's not you anymore, then we're defining a plan to exit it.

(01:13:16):
I would say that less than 10% of companies we see are taking this hard stance, but I would say they are probably the ones that are farthest along getting the most adoption and are seeing the most results of the ones that are taking those hard stances. There's a bunch of other stuff I could talk about, but that's the high level of what we've seen across a bunch of different companies.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:37):
That is incredibly interesting. I'm glad we went there. I have a newsletter post coming out soon, probably before this episode, that touches on a lot of advice along these lines. I am excited for you guys to keep seeing these insights into companies and sharing more of this because this is I think what a lot of people are looking for, just like things aren't quite clicking at our company. We keep hearing everyone just getting so much more productive. All these companies are running more efficiently and it's not working here. I think that's the kind of advice a lot of people are looking for, so thank you for sharing all that. 

(01:14:09):
Brian, is there anything else that you wanted to touch on? Anything else you wanted to leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Brian Balfour (01:14:15):
Well, actually, just a couple more points on this topic we should go. There's probably two more things I would say about this. One is that, if you're a CEO listening to this, I would say that most CEOs or most executives are incredibly disconnected from the actual AI adoption taking place inside their companies. I think a lot of executives who have done these decrees and all that kind of stuff think it's happening naturally, but we talked to both groups. We talked to tons of end users and we talked to tons of executives. 

(01:14:49):
The story we hear from the end users, the PMs, the eng, all that kind of stuff that we talk to using all this stuff, one of the main questions we ask them is, if we're talking to somebody who's picked up a prototyping tool, say, "Well, how many other people on the product and design team are using this?" Almost 90% of the time it's like, "Ah, it's me and this one other person," and everybody else hasn't taken it up. So there's a huge disconnect. 

(01:15:17):
We heard one story, and I can't say the name, but it's a company we all know. It's a major tech company, a tech-forward company. CEO's been out there talking about being AI-native. We talked to one of their principal PMs. Person was early to the prototyping tools. This person shared a prototype with the designer, the eng manager. The designer and eng manager escalated it to the VPs. It caused this whole conversation. Month later, it was still stalling out. This PM happened to then attend a happy hour where the CEO was at and approached the CEO and told the CEO about the experiment that they were running with prototyping and stuff, and the CEO was like, "This is fantastic. Where is it at right now?" He was like, "Oh, well, X, Y, Z happened." The CEO had no idea. And then the CEO is like, "Okay, let me take care of it," and then the next day, it happened.

(01:16:18):
So one is that you have to go to the ground floor on this stuff. Some of the best companies like Shopify and others are measuring actual adoption and usage. They've gone to the extreme on that front to get a bunch of signals and close to the ground. It just goes to show that this is... I don't think we want to talk about going founder mode, but the reality is it's not just about getting into the weeds of your product, but with something this sizable, you got to get into the weeds of the transformation to really understand what's going on and adopt it. That's point number one. 

(01:16:58):
The second point I would say is Fareed, we do this podcast called Unsolicited Feedback, Fareed Mosavat had this great quote on it. He was like, "Look, your output is constrained by the slowest part of your system." That stuck in my head because it's absolutely true. If you think about AI adoption as a system, there's all parts of the system that could be slowing adoption. It might be that people don't feel permission or they don't have the budget or they don't have the knowledge, all these types of things. In a lot of these cases, it's things like IT, legal, procurement are the slowest part of the friction and are setting the pace of all of this output.

(01:17:43):
You can also see this in just product teams. There's been all this talk about product managers are becoming the new bottleneck because engineers are speeding up. Well, that's because people are speeding up one part of the product system and not the other parts, which makes sense. They adopted all of this tooling for engineers because they're the biggest head count and the most expensive and all that type of stuff, but product is an output of design, PMs, and engineering. The system is there not to produce code, it's to ship product, and shipping product is the function of those three things. 

(01:18:19):
If you just accelerate one part of the system, you're just going to move to the bottleneck to another part and your actual product output, the output of the system doesn't accelerate, either. I think people have to really understand those two things: what is actually happening on the ground floor, and what is the slowest part? What is the thing that is causing the slowest part of the adoption? Just attack them ruthlessly if you're really serious about making this transition.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:47):
What a wild time we're living through. So much changes. 

Brian Balfour (01:18:48):
It is a wild time, yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:51):
All these ways that we're all so used to, okay, this is how we do it.

Brian Balfour (01:18:54):
Yeah. It's exciting and exhausting at the same time, man. That's how I think about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:00):
Such a simple way of describing the road.

Brian Balfour (01:19:02):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:03):
Oh, my God. Okay, Brian, is there anything else before we get through our very exciting lightning round?

Brian Balfour (01:19:08):
That's it. Let's do lightning round.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:09):
Here we go.

Brian Balfour (01:19:09):
Zap, zap, zap. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:11):
Ding, ding, ding. All right, Brian, I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Brian Balfour (01:19:14):
Let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:14):
Okay. What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Brian Balfour (01:19:20):
My God honest answer is that I have not had the time to finish an entire book since I had my second child. From a complete book standpoint, I have not been able to... Things that I actively read on a regular basis, just other content out there that I'll throw out there is, gosh, Jamin Ball from Altimeter Capital writes this great newsletter called Clouded Judgment, which is mixture of market thoughts as well as market stats. That's really useful to help me keep a pulse on the market. I was just reading through some stuff from NFX that's been pretty good lately on all of this. I know James Currier and I, we lived a lot of the same cycles through social and stuff, so I tend to identify with that. I don't know, those are two things that I love reading.

(01:20:19):
Sorry, I'll give one more shout-out to a different podcast, which is from two guys at Spark Capital, Nabeel Hyatt, which I know from my early Boston days, and Fraser, sorry, I'm blanking on the last name right now, who was Head of Product at OpenAI, and they've got a great format where it's just those two riffing on some ideas and stuff. I highly suggest that one. I like that one a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:45):
Here's my reading tip that has changed my reading habits. Bryan Johnson, the longevity guy, he has this advice for better sleep, which includes, before you go to sleep, read for 10 minutes in bed. 

Brian Balfour (01:20:58):
It does put you to sleep. I don't feel like I retain anything that I read that close to bed, though. Do you feel like you retain it?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:05):
I do, I do. I'm reading fiction. It's nonfiction. Sorry. You want to read something calm, not like I'm learning. I'm reading fiction and it's really nice. Knowing that this is going to help me sleep better makes me motivated. 

Brian Balfour (01:21:17):
There's an incentive. There's a reward there. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:19):
The reward, yeah. 

Brian Balfour (01:21:20):
They're talking about rewards and creating behavior change, yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:23):
Exactly. The reason to do it is this whole thing is you want to get to low resting heart rate, and that helps lower your resting heart. 

Brian Balfour (01:21:29):
I've got some other sleep tips on that front if you want to go down that path, but we'll save that for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:34):
Please, for the third podcast. Okay, next question. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really recently enjoyed?

Brian Balfour (01:21:40):
It's not new, but I just rewatched Silicon Valley that I hadn't watched in a number of times. It's painful because the first few seasons, I went through almost every one of those moments in my first startup, like hiring the gray-haired CEO, the funding falling through at the last second, all the crazy stuff, but going back and watching that, there's just some extra nuances and stuff that I feel like they wrote really well that I thought was really good. I've really been watching that. 

(01:22:16):
The other thing that I've watched is just more of a just pure entertainment, calming thing, turn the brain off is Owen Wilson's new show on Apple TV, Stick, which is about him as a former professional golfer and all that. I won't ruin the show and stuff, but it's a very nice calming, little bit fun type of show. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:40):
I've been seeing that on my Apple TV. Maybe I should check it out. Good tip. Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love? It could be a gadget, it could be a app on your phone, it could be something in your computer. It could be nothing at all.

Brian Balfour (01:22:54):
You can't see it, but I just changed my whole setup. Now I have a UltraGear super-wide curved screen with a very nice standing desk from, I believe it's called Ergonofis. Er.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:13):
Ergonofis?

Brian Balfour (01:23:15):
Yes. I think it's Ergonofis, E-R-G-O-N-O-F-I-S. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:21):
All right. 

Brian Balfour (01:23:21):
It's a very nice, sleek standing desk. Very stable, very quiet. Very much enjoy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:29):
Excellent tip. And the curved monitor, very cool. Okay, two more questions. Do you have a life motto that you often come back to and find useful in work or in life, something you share with folks, something that you think about when times are hard or just generally?

Brian Balfour (01:23:42):
Look, it's a little cliche at this point, but it's somewhere around here, I used to have the quote printed out about the man in the arena. Especially in times like this where so many things are changing and there's so much competition, but so much opportunity for great, I really both respect and enjoy the game and spending time with folks that are in the arena figuring this stuff out, tinkering with things. That's what I keep coming back to, especially been at Reforge for 10 years, that's a good portion of my life, and we've gone through some great periods and some tough periods, so I tend to come back to that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:30):
And that's what always separated Reforge from so much other content and advice is it's people in the arena sharing their wisdom, not just a bunch of influencers. It's sad that Chamath made that quote so cringey.

Brian Balfour (01:24:41):
I know, I know. That's why I said it's a little cliche cringe right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:47):
Screwed it up for everyone. 

Brian Balfour (01:24:49):
Yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:49):
Final question. Brian, you don't know this, but your parenting advice on Adam Fishman's podcast-

Brian Balfour (01:24:54):
Oh.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:55):
... really impacted my parenting philosophy, specifically this line you had about independence.

Brian Balfour (01:25:01):
Oh, yes. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:02):
I'd love for you to just share that insight about how you think about raising kids,

Brian Balfour (01:25:08):
I wish I could remember where I grabbed this from so I could attribute it properly, but basically, the philosophy is, if you think about going from when they're born until they're essentially 18 and leave the home, your job as a parent is to essentially make them more and more independent. What that involves is continuously looking for opportunities for them to make even bigger and riskier decisions for themselves as they grow up and you're there as a support to those decisions, but letting them make those decisions on their own so that by the time they're 18, they are a fully independent person able to think through those decisions themselves. 

(01:26:03):
Now, look, my sons are young. They're five and three, so it's not like I'm having them make life and death decisions or where we might buy our next house or stuff like that, but it's even small things at this age of... My oldest, five and a half, is really starting to learn and get curious about money and how you spend money and where new things come from and how you earn money. Rather than just buying things for him, he's got money from his grandparents and stuff saved up, and we can be like, "Okay, you can buy that thing, but you're going to spend this," and try to teach him the consequences and all that kind of stuff, and then when he breaks something...

(01:26:50):
It's just small things like that, but thinking about the time from zero to 18 as this spectrum of independence and being a supporting role in what you're essentially doing is you're trying to move as many decisions, the percentage of decisions you make for them down to zero by the time that they're 18. That's something that I've kept in the back of my head since really seeing that. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:19):
Thank you for sharing that. I know I didn't tell you that I was going to ask you about this, so that was a beautiful way of summarizing it. 

Brian Balfour (01:27:25):
Yeah, I couldn't remember that whole podcast. I had no idea what I said, but-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:25):
I would say you nailed it.

Brian Balfour (01:27:28):
... that's a good one, yeah. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:31):
Brian, two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to reach out and where can they find the products you guys offer? Whatever you want to plug. Also, how can listeners be useful to you?

Brian Balfour (01:27:41):
Check out reforge.com. Check out our new products like Reforge Insights. They're on the website. You can find me personally, my writing, including a bunch of the stuff that we talked about today now on Substack. Just recently moved. You can either go to my website, brianbalfour.com, where I have some info or just the blog.brianbalfour.com where all of my new writing is taking place. Those are the two major pieces. 

(01:28:08):
Last but not least is that, as I mentioned, Fareed Mosavat, who I used to work with at Slack, we have this fun podcast. The two of us get on there and riff like we were having dinner every couple of weeks about different product and strategy types of things. It's a fun format for us, so if that's something you enjoy, it's called Unsolicited Feedback, where we give feedback and advice to nobody that ever asked for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:36):
That's amazing. Perfect title. Brian, thank you so much for being here.

Brian Balfour (01:28:41):
Yeah, thanks for having me again. This is great. 

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:43):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You've worked at two businesses that have done incredibly well combining product in ops.

Brian Tolkin (00:00:03):
Uber always has this mentality and Opendoor does two of the product operations, twin turbine jet plane where you can fly the plane on one engine for a little bit if you need to, but it's operating most efficiently and effectively if both are working together.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:17):
What has having been in ops done to make you a better product leader?

Brian Tolkin (00:00:21):
Gave a really deep understanding of how the business actually works. It's a pretty good foundation for them going on to say, okay, what do we actually want to build in a more scalable technology way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:31):
Something else I've heard that you're very good at is staying very calm under pressure.

Brian Tolkin (00:00:34):
I've slept on the floor in China before launching uberPOOL, and when you reflect the stress onto your teams, everybody tenses out. It counterintuitively doesn't produce better outcomes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:51):
Today my guest is Brian Tolkin. Brian is currently head of product and design at Opendoor. Before that, he spent nearly five years at Uber where he joined as employee 100. Before Uber had UberX or uberPOOL or any shared rides, he actually started on the ops team at Uber, moved into product, ended up leading product and launch of uberPOOL, and then taking it global. He also started the product operations function at Uber. Before that function was really even a thing, which I didn't know until the chat that we had. In our conversation, Brian shares a ton of lessons about building products with a heavy operational component. Also, how to run great product reviews, how he implements the jobs to be done, framework and Opendoor's successfully.

(00:01:32):
The story behind Zillow trying to compete with Opendoor failing and then partnering instead. Plus a ton of great stories from the early days of Uber and Opendoor, and so much more. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Brian Tolkin. Brian, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Brian Tolkin (00:02:00):
Thank you, appreciate it. Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:02):
First of all, just a huge thank you to Kayvon Beykpour for connecting us, introducing us. He said all kinds of amazingly nice things about you. He also gave me some very hard questions to ask you. I hope you've come prepared.

Brian Tolkin (00:02:12):
Terrific. Put me in my hot seat.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:14):
Okay, I want to spend a bunch of time talking about product and ops. You started your career in operations. At Uber you actually started on the ops team and you moved into product. You've also worked at both Uber and at Opendoor, which have both huge operational components. I think it's really rare that people, one, see a company scale to the heights of Uber and Opendoor with such a heavy operational component that are still tech companies and also it's really where someone starts an ops and then moves into product and ends up where you are, where your chief product officer, really successful company. So I have a bunch of questions here. Maybe the first is just what has having been in ops done to make you a better product leader? How does that change the way that you operate as a product leader?

Brian Tolkin (00:02:58):
Starting on the operations side gave a really deep understanding of how the business actually works. You are truly operating it day in and day out and the success of the city is in large part driven by the inputs that you are putting into it every single day on the ground and whether or not there was rain that weekend, which was a nice driver of metrics, but talking to customers every single day like one-on-one onboarding drivers responding to support tickets, there's no centralized support team, there was no closer to the customer, right? And so I think that foundation actually for really understanding what moves the business and being super close to the customer actually is a pretty good foundation for them going on to say, okay, what do we actually want to build in a more scalable technology way?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:52):
This episode is brought to you by Pendo, the only all-in-one product experience platform for any type of application. Tired of bouncing around multiple tools to uncover what's really happening inside your product? With all the tools you need in one simple to use platform, Pendo makes it easy to answer critical questions about how users are engaging with your product and then turn those insights into action. Also, you can get your users to do what you actually want them to do. First, Pendo is built around product analytics, seeing what your users are actually doing in your apps so that you can optimize their experience. Next, Pendo lets you deploy in-app guides that lead users through the actions that matter most.

(00:04:31):
Then Pendo integrates user feedback so that you can capture and analyze what people actually want. And the new thing in Pendo, session replays. A very cool way to visualize user sessions. I'm not surprised at all that over 10,000 companies use it today. Visit pendo.io/lenny to create your free Pendo account today and start building better experiences across every corner of your product. PS, you want to take your product led knowhow a step further? Check out Pendo's lineup of free certification courses led by talk product experts and designed to help you grow and advance in your career. Learn more and experience the power of the Pendo platform today at pendo.io/lenny.

MUSIC (00:05:09):
Pendo.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:15):
This episode is brought to you by Explo, a game changer for customer facing analytics and data reporting. Are your users craving more dashboards, reports and analytics within your product? Are you tired of trying to build it yourself? As a product leader, you probably have these requests in your roadmap, but the struggle to prioritize them is real. Building analytics from scratch can be time-consuming, expensive, and a really challenging process. Enter Explo. Explo is a fully white labeled embedded analytics solution designed entirely with your user in mind. Getting started is easy. Explo connects to any relational database or warehouse and with its low-code functionality, you can build and style dashboards in. Once you're ready, simply embed the dashboard or report into your application with a tiny code snippet. The best part, your end users can use Explo's AI features for their own report and dashboard generation eliminating customer data requests for your support team. Build and embed a fully white labeled analytics experience in days.

(00:06:18):
Try it for free at explo.co/lenny. That's E-X-P-L-O/lenny. I've seen that a lot of companies, and this was definitely true to Airbnb, where the product team looks down a little bit on the ops team where they're like, "oh, we're doing things that are going to scale to millions of users. We're doing these things that are going to apply to everyone." There's this ops team over there doing a few things that are going to not scale. They keep asking us for things to build for their one-off ideas. What do you think that product teams often maybe miss or don't understand about the ops teams that would help them see them in a different light?

Brian Tolkin (00:06:56):
Yeah, it's a great question and I think Uber always had this mentality and OpenDoor does too of like a twin turbine jet plane where you can fly the plane on one engine for a little bit if you need to, but it's operating most efficiently and effectively if both are working together, and I think that's really true, right? The reality is operations teams, local teams, can iterate faster, can scale talking to customers really much more efficiently, have great qualitative insights, and so if it's seen more as a harmony instead of a competition, I think that's really, really helpful where it's like, okay, how do we get the insights that are happening day in and day out in the field, on the ground, whatever that may be, and help us build better products because of that, right?

(00:07:50):
Like a PM sitting in San Francisco can't be in Opendoor's case 50 markets, walking houses every single day in Uber's case, whatever, a thousand cities understanding the nuances of safety in South America and it's just not possible, but what you can do is foster a really good relationship and a really good feedback loop of how people who do deeply understand those things can help give insights. Now is actually the birth of product operations was that insight as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:22):
Can you say more on that?

Brian Tolkin (00:08:23):
Yeah, sure. So, sorry, I should probably define what product operations was. At Uber it was basically this notion that we had centralized, this was later in my career at Uber, but we had a centralized product team building stuff mostly in San Francisco, not strictly through the Ross, but at this point around the world, but mostly in San Francisco and then we had a very globally distributed operations team, and there was a bidirectional feedback loop that wasn't super strong and that feedback loop was basically when the EPD teams in San Francisco built new features, how do we effectively put it in global markets and then how do we effectively get input from global markets to better build features. And so one solution to that problem, our solution at the time was to start up a new function called product operations who had accountability and reported into operations but physically sat with and operated much like a member of the product team to help solve that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:23):
Is that maybe the first time there's a... Did you invent product operations as a function?

Brian Tolkin (00:09:28):
I don't think so because at the time, I believe Google had a function, I can't remember what Google called it was something slightly different, but I met with a few folks who had been in similar type roles at Google and a couple other places, so I don't take credit for certainly for inventing IT and other people have actually dabbled in this model at Uber before me there was just a formalization of it and our actual building out of the organization, et cetera.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:54):
Did none of that. Sounds like you basically helped make it a thing. I know you're being very modest, I think. Coming back to your point about decentralized operations teams, something I've read is that search pricing came out of one GM and a market just testing, emailing all the drivers, hey, we're going to give you extra if you drive on Saturday night. Is that true?

Brian Tolkin (00:10:15):
That would've been probably a little bit before my time, but that being said, one thing that is true is that surge pricing for actually quite sometimes all of 2012, certainly 2013 probably, I don't know when we necessarily switched, was very much a human in the loop system or a very manual system where GMs in every city would control basically the parameters in which surge would operate and so much of the time that would need, for example, Monday through Friday, there would be no search, it couldn't flip on, and then Friday nights and Saturday nights it would flip on from whatever you set, 7:00 PM to 3:00 AM and the cap was X, whatever the cap was. And then within those parameters the algorithm would optimize for what the price was. But yeah, GMs controlled whether it was on or off and what geographies were surging.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:16):
Wow, I didn't know that. Was that out of we believe we are better than the algorithms or we just don't have time to make them amazing yet, so we're just going to help them along?

Brian Tolkin (00:11:25):
Yeah, I think it was probably a function of a bunch of stuff, one of which is like, hey, this is a fairly new concept and it's powerful and dangerous and so let's make sure we understand what's happening. The second is this belief that local city teams know their cities best and so you might know that an event is happening, a baseball game gets out and it's like, oh, I know that this baseball game's going to get out at 10:00 PM so I'm going to set surge at 9:45 and the algorithm may not be able to pick that up. And then the third is the technical constraint of nowadays clearly it's all automated, but it's really hard to build a fully dynamic, always on geospatially aware pricing system and not just a little bit of time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:17):
That makes sense. I feel like you're full of wild stories from your time at Uber. Is there one that comes to mind of just, I think you helped scale in China, uberPOOL?

Brian Tolkin (00:12:17):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:29):
Maybe that's the one. I don't know. Can you share wild story from early Uber days?

Brian Tolkin (00:12:31):
Yeah, so in the early days of Uber, one fun story is obviously UberX is a random mainstream product but has a funny, silly name, UberX. This product in the early days was going to be all hybrid and had a bunch of different potential names. I was not personally driving this, this was someone else on the operations team, but they built the model for what this product could be and there's no name for it yet, so it was going to be a placeholder. So what do you put in some placeholder? X. So UberX and then the company was moving quickly enough, the product got the green light, it launched, and here we are, I don't know, 12 years later, 11 years later, whatever it is and UberX is the name that stuck.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:21):
That is hilarious. I love it. So it was a placeholder. It's like many products start that way where they're like, this is just the temporary name, and they're like, okay, I guess everyone just knows it this way now we're going to stick with it.

Brian Tolkin (00:13:31):
Exactly. It's too expensive to change and rebrand at this point.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:34):
That's an awesome story.

Brian Tolkin (00:13:36):
One that is good about scaling Uber uberPOOL in China is we were launching Uber pool in China and this was going to be, China at the time was pretty big for Uber, but uberPOOL was not there yet, and so we were going to launch. And myself and a few other folks were in Chengdu China, which is the first Chinese market that we were launching uberPOOL in and we were going to be on the ground took to launch. We wanted to go live at, I believe it was 6:00 AM for rush hour on, I don't remember the day, but whatever, Monday morning, and so we're there over the weekend getting ready to set up and at the same time we were doing some data center testing. And so we flipped on all the testing infrastructure and thought it was going to work and nothing works, and the matching algorithm just isn't working and we're like, oh my god, now it's whatever, 5:00 PM the day before we're supposed to go live, 6:00 PM, 7:00 PM okay, let's get on the phone with the US, try and figure out what's going on.

(00:14:43):
I remember I slept about 30 minutes that night between 2:00 and 3:00 AM being like, okay, well, we have to go live at 6:00 AM I think there was some press around it. We were planning on going live and I think we got everything finally working at probably about five 30 or six in the morning and launched just in the nick of time. And I'll never forget, we launched, it was great, we monitored, everything was good, and then we walked out for breakfast at 7:30 in the morning. Everyone sleep depressed, no one slept all night and we got these pancakes street food things and I have to imagine they were not that good, but in my mind it was the best meal I've ever had in my life.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:25):
It's like a meal after a marathon or a big hike.

Brian Tolkin (00:15:31):
Exactly. Yeah, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:32):
Everything's so delicious. This comes up a lot of just these moments that are so incredibly stressful and hard and leap deprived end up being the best memories and the best stories to tell and things you look back at fondly. It's so weird how human nature is like that.

Brian Tolkin (00:15:46):
Yeah, I mean another one more recent for Opendoor was when COVID hit, physically we buy and sell homes, and so we were physically going into people's homes and suddenly March 2020 going into people's homes was not something people were comfortable with. And you look at the real estate data coming out of China at the time and it looked like coming to a standstill, and so we actually turned off the core business and we stopped buying homes for a few months. hey, we can't go in and we don't know if anyone's going to be buying any homes, and so what do we do? And we took those few months and then came out the other side and had virtualized the whole process. Then it was pretty stressful, right, because looking at a business that relies on going into people's homes and suddenly you can't do that anymore, what do you do? So, again, a fond memory to look back on a very stressful time in the moment where it feels very, very difficult.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:51):
Just since you mentioned Opendoor, I think many people have heard of Opendoor. Maybe just give a quick explanation of what Opendoor does for people that aren't exactly sure.

Brian Tolkin (00:16:58):
So we're a digital platform to buy and sell real estate. The core product today is a seller focused product where people can go online, enter some information about their home, and we'll make an all cash offer to be able to sell simplicity and certainty. So the product really works for people who want something that is certain and simple and easy. I don't know if you've ever sold a home, but it can be a very, very, very successful difficult process with showings and open houses and how to price it and will it sell and all of that stuff. And so we offer basically a way to skip the whole process.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:41):
So you basically sell your house to Opendoor and it's just like, cool, done, move on.

Brian Tolkin (00:17:45):
You picked your closing date, you move out when you want. Yeah, there's no hassle.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:53):
Sounds amazing. I want that. Coming back to ops and product, just to close this thread again, you've worked at two businesses that have done incredibly well combining product and ops. Are there any just broad lessons you've taken away from how to make these two teams and functions work well together and to build a business that's very ops heavy but also offer driven?

Brian Tolkin (00:18:15):
The first one we touched on, which is a, there's just got to be mutual respect. Both functions have their time and their place and their skillsets, and you just don't build big businesses of this type without respecting the fact that that both need to exist. The second, particularly on the product and engineering side, is really understanding where and how the technology leverage comes from the business and then being really focused on making sure generally, especially in the earlier days, you are more limited on the technical resourcing side than you might be on the operational resourcing side. And so how do you be really focused on where to invest your time, effort, and energy technically, which is why most of the engineering effort for Uber was on the dispatching system and the pricing system. That's just where the leverage was at the time, given the scarcity of resources.

(00:19:11):
And so I think the second one is being really intentional about where those techs are and then being really forthcoming and saying, hey, that means all these other places where yes, it can make things easier, more efficient, et cetera, et cetera. We are okay not investing in right now, and that needs to be an explicit decision and very transparent. But then the last bit I would say is a deep understanding that the real world has entropy and it's hard and it's messy for us at Opendoor, we go into homes, someone may not be home, scheduling may be off, at Uber the driver may cancel the radio GPS. All these things happen, right? Computers are deterministic, but humans aren't, right? And so building products that have a little bit more flex or a little bit more fail safes in case those things happen becomes a little bit more of a paramount.

(00:20:08):
One other thing, the last thing I would say is I think that the companies evolve as well. So what I talked about at the beginning of Uber being very focused from an engineering and product side on the dispatching system and the pricing system, obviously over time not to evolve now it centralized all of these functions as the company got bigger and more mature and scale and optimization started to be more important and expansion and that Petri dish of trying new stuff and the tools got better and the tech got easier and there was more internal infrastructure. And so over time things can start one way and shift over time as the business needs.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:52):
Let's actually spend more time there. You keep saying things that make me want to dig deeper. So at Airbnb we went through the same thing where there was all these local ops teams driving supply, finding homes, bringing out the platform, and then there's this tipping point where the product in organic growth or word of mouth ended up driving more and then orders of magnitude more. So there was no need for these folks to spend time doing these things. Can you just maybe share an example, either we Opendoor, when you talk about there's a time and a place and a skillset for ops, how that evolved? What was the team doing initially and then what did they end up doing as things grew?

Brian Tolkin (00:21:25):
Yeah, I mean, maybe a very easy good example to pick just one part of the Uber process in the early days is at small scale, actually back when it was Uber black drivers, every driver was individually onboarded in a 90 minute to a two-hour in-person in the office onboarding with deep setting of expectations. The next version of that... So that's obviously very ops driven. The next version of that is a small classroom type setting of three or five or six drivers at a given time. Also, very ops driven. And then as we got into more mass market products like Uber Taxi or UberX, it was like, okay, maybe 20 or 30 at a time. So now it's a little bit bigger classroom setting. And we said, okay, let's make a video. Instead of giving verbally the same presentation, let's just make an onboarding video and that was the next set of scale, but now suddenly we have a different problem, which is okay, you have to validate all of these credentials.

(00:22:32):
So most driver's license who they are, all that stuff at one person, easy at three to four at a time, easy, 10 at a time, a little more challenging but fine. At 20 at a time, okay, you're starting to run up onto it now you fast-forward six months and you're doing a thousand a week or whatever, suddenly your system breaks and it's like, okay, we have reached the point where operational system improvements is no longer viable. So, you say, okay, we have gone from the iteration stage to the scale stage and technology is uniquely good at scaling. So now we say, okay, instead of having a bunch of folks around the world taking pictures of driver's licenses and validating and doing all that stuff, how do we integrate with some type of OCR technology or auto recognition of driver's licenses that feeds to a system that knows what a driver's license is or can do automatic validation and suddenly you've done two things.

(00:23:27):
One, you've scaled your system, and two, you've just created a ton of time for what at the time was probably dozens if not hundreds of people running these onboarding sessions all over the country, the world at the time to do other stuff. And so now you can level that up and say, okay, do we do more analytics? Do we do more figure out the next process that needs optimization or whatever the case may be in that virtuous cycle just continues.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:53):
The way I like to think about this is do things that don't scale and then scale the things that you're doing. That's the phrase I always come back to.

Brian Tolkin (00:23:58):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:00):
This reminds me of a hot take that previous podcast guest shared in a newsletter post Casey Winters. He talked about that operations is usually, and it's a hot take, that operations is a sign of inefficiency and over time your job is to squeeze that away and make it product software as much as possible. Doesn't mean you always get there. Thoughts?

Brian Tolkin (00:24:23):
Yeah, I actually don't. Fundamentally, it depends on what the operations is, but I don't fundamentally disagree, but I think that the right lens to think about it is... And then those folks can move on to the next challenge. And so there's always another hill to climb. And so I think that was one of the things at Uber and Opendoor where there's this culture of on the ground experimentation that's really helpful where we were just talking about driver onboarding may now be solved with technology so you have a few extra hours a day. How do we get better at optimizing the UberX system? How do you start tinkering with food delivery? How do you start thinking about higher capacity vehicles? How do you think about better feedback loop for those manual surge pricing toggles that we talked about? So I generally agree it just generally free across and solve more problems.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:21):
It feels like a big part of this is making sure the operations teams understand there's more opportunity, even if this ends up being automated, your job is not going to go away. We're going to find something new to try and experiment and do things that don't skip.

Brian Tolkin (00:25:34):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:34):
Awesome. Okay. Going a completely different direction.

Brian Tolkin (00:25:37):
Great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:38):
I hear you're very good at product reviews.

Brian Tolkin (00:25:40):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:41):
A few people told me this. I'm curious how you set up a product review and any things you've learned, any tips for how to run an effective product review?

Brian Tolkin (00:25:48):
That's very whoever mentioned that. But yes, big fan of doing them actually in particular to maybe bridge the conversations in companies that have ops driven cadences or start out very ops driven because the cadences can sometimes be different. And so the operational cadences that you might have something like a WVRA weekly business review may not be conducive to always picking your head up and saying like, Hey, where's the product going on a slightly longer timeframe. And so I think product reviews in general for all companies are probably really helpful, but actually in particular for some of the product and operations led companies. In terms of things I've learned, I think being really intentional about what the goals are, I think it's okay to say that there are two goals, a goal of accountability and inform to an audience.

(00:26:43):
But also most importantly, I think this is the primary goal is to help make the product better, to help the teams think through a problem and to have that, again, back to our earliest conversation, be a very intellectual conversation about the work and how to make the product better and not super scary. Product reviews hopefully are not feeling like firing squads. That's a scary environment to be in and not necessarily one that's conducive to how do we make the product better. Obviously sometimes the conversations have to get a little intense, but in general that's what we're shooting for is something that helps the team go back and think through how to make the product better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:24):
So the two goals you try to communicate for your product reviews, accountability slash informing people what's happening, but also just like we are here to make the product better and setting that context. Yep. Is there anything you'd do specifically to make it not feel like a firing squad? Like you're coming in here to be attacked and criticized? Do you set context at the beginning of the meeting? Is this just a part of the culture?

Brian Tolkin (00:27:43):
Yeah, I think definitely part of the culture, but also I am a firm believer in general that the people closest to the problems also have the best context to solve that problem. And so as a more senior voice in the room, often the job is probing, asking questions, throwing out ideas in a way that says like, hey, this is an idea. This is not a mandate, this is a thought. And if there's context missing that would inform the product direction, then providing that context in not a question asking sense, but hey, this is context that you might not be aware of. And so I think it's all in how you show up as a leader and what that looks like in terms of probing and pushing the team on dimensions that they may not be thinking about. And then understanding that the team is bringing a perspective that you don't have, which is they think about this problem 40, 50, 60 hours a week, and you might think about this problem three hours a week. So you bring them a breath, the team brings a depth in haven't been there yet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:49):
I don't know if you heard Dharmesh Shah's episode or his thing on flash tags. Have you seen this?

Brian Tolkin (00:28:54):
I have not, no.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:55):
Okay. He has a whole system. So you talked about how as a leader you want people to not take everything you tell them as feedback as I need to do this. So he has a whole set of hashtags that communicate how important this is to him from hashtag FYI to suggestion, to a plea.

Brian Tolkin (00:29:13):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:14):
A plea to you.

Brian Tolkin (00:29:17):
This was actually explained to me. I don't think I've seen the original source, so I'll go back and watch it, but this was explained to me as I'm actually a big fan. I think that's great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:26):
Yeah, just get everyone on the same page. Okay. Maybe one last question here. Who do you try to invite to product reviews? Do you have any frameworks and ways of thinking of who to invite, who not to invite?

Brian Tolkin (00:29:36):
Yeah, good question. We, I would say have oscillated over time, but in general, big subscribers of the best conversations happen when they're relatively small, so try and keep it under 10. Could be wide distribution of the document. The artifacts created are actually really powerful and they're powerful for the whole team to understand. And secret power is they're very powerful for new people who are onboarding to be like, here are the last 20 product reviews, you'll get a pretty good idea of what's going on. But generally the conversation itself try and be relatively tight. We try to keep it under 10.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:15):
And these artifacts, you mean the recordings of the meeting that people can watch or?

Brian Tolkin (00:30:20):
Yeah. Or just the document depends on what the company culture is, whether you want to record it or just have the document either way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:26):
And then is there some specific cadence you operate on? Is it like a weekly product review that people can sign up for? Does every team, how do you like to set this up the cadence?

Brian Tolkin (00:30:35):
Yeah, obviously it scales are with the size of the company. For us right now, what's working well is signup cadence. We have two slots a week that anyone can sign up for as their product area needs it. And then if there's something that we would love to see that we haven't seen in a bit, we do a little bit of all in telling to make sure that the work is generally cycling through on a quarterly basis.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:59):
This episode is brought to you by Attio. A radically new type of CRM. There's a world where your CRM is powerful, easily configured, and deeply intuitive. Attio makes that a reality. Attio is built specifically for the next era of companies. It syncs with your data sources, easily configures to their unique structures and works for any go-to-market motion from self-serve to sales led. Attio automatically enriches your contacts, syncs your email and calendar, gives you powerful reports and lets you quickly build Zapier style automations. The next era of companies deserves more than an inflexible one size fits all CRM. Join modal, replicate 11 labs, and more, and scale your startup to the next level. Head to attio.com/lenny and you'll get 15% off your first year. That's A-T-T-I-O.com/lenny.

(00:31:54):
Adjacent topic. I hear you're a big fan of drops to be done, which is okay, so it's a fun recurring topic on this podcast. We've had many people that love it, many people that hate it. I love seeing both sides of it. I love that you find it helpful and you implement it at Opendoor. I'd love to hear just how you actually apply it at Opendoor, what you've learned about how to apply jobs to be done effectively.

Brian Tolkin (00:32:17):
Yeah. I think like all frameworks, the right answer is to pick your set of frameworks, have more tools in your toolbox, and then actually understand when and how to apply them. So we try to avoid being a hammer and everything's a nail. We try to for course the framework if it's not working. But I think what I really like about it is it forces you to put yourself in the customer's shoes. I think in a slightly deeper way and be a little bit more empathetic when I think about building at Opendoor versus say building at Uber or when you are building at Airbnb is we are not... Most people at Opendoor, we don't have homes to sell every week or every month, nor do we buy homes every week or every month. On average in the US is something people do once every seven years.

(00:33:10):
I'm sure the average at Opendoor is something similar, and so it's a little bit harder to be a customer. I took Uber every day. You probably use Airbnb a number of times a year. And so in some sense for some of those companies, you can bill for yourself, you would intuit the job to be done because you're just doing it for yourself. We don't necessarily have that context. And so a framework that forces us to be really thoughtful and intentional about how a customer might perceive our product is really helpful. The other thing that I like about it is the canonical version of it encourages you to think about the context in which the user's operating or the other things outside of your product that they might be going through.

(00:33:59):
And in our case, the home buying or selling journey often is a certainly multi-week, if not multi-month or multi quarter journey with a lot of complexity and a lot of conversations outside of our product. You may be talking to an agent, you may be talking to a friend, you may be driving around the city trying to find a house, and the framework is very flexible and encouraging of saying what is actually the job to be done of this user when they're thinking about our product and what is the context in which they're operating.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:29):
I'd love to go one level deeper to talk about how you actually implement it. Do you have templates of, you have a startup project as a blank, I blank, blank, blank? How do you...

Brian Tolkin (00:34:40):
I would say we're medium rigorous on template standardization or adherence. So we do have a template, the standard product review template talks about jobs to be done and has a section for what is the problem statement and what are the jobs to be done.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:58):
And this is a doc that when you're coming to a product review, the person running it and coming is filling out this document?

Brian Tolkin (00:35:04):
Correct, pre-filling it up, sorry, pre-filling it out. And again, I think we are not sticklers about always using that template, but I think the beauty of a template is yes, it sets expectations of what you expect, but it's also just easier often for people to be able to work off something. And so yeah, it's part of our product review template and then part of our planning process as well. Because we've used it for a while. I think there's been an internalization of the culture where people will also just start commenting about it or writing about it and saying, hey, what is the job to be done here? Or what is the user trying to do? Which is maybe another colloquial phrase in it. And so, yeah, I think there's a cultural seeping that has happened.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:49):
From memory, just what is in this template. So what's the phrasing that you try to use for setting up a problem?

Brian Tolkin (00:35:55):
Yeah, yeah. I mean, the specific framing, I would have to go remind myself on the template itself, but generally it looks like context, problem, potential solution, risks, risks/premortal and measurement of success. And then we also try to bucket our product reviews by stage. So you could be in the ideation stage, which might look very different than at the very end of the process. Like, Hey, we're getting ready to ship speak now forever hold your piece. Those two artifacts will also be very different.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:35):
Okay. So it's not as a blank the standard jobs to be done language, it's not exactly how you implement it's more just make sure we're thinking of it what is the problem for the customer? What is the context of their problem?

Brian Tolkin (00:36:47):
Correct. Yeah. Yeah, we're not math living our template.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:52):
Okay, awesome. Any other tips or lessons about just working well with this concept of jobs to be done? Maybe when you come into Opendoor and like, hey everyone, we're going to be thinking this way. Is there anything there that would be useful to people if they're trying to operate this way?

Brian Tolkin (00:37:06):
Recognizing that correctly implementing a framework, any framework, but if you don't in particular, we can talk about takes a little bit of time and getting used to and understanding. And so I don't think you can just like, okay, we're going to make the template and then that makes the content better. That just takes people's content and they wedge it into the template. It's actually the cultural internalization of like, hey, this might be phrased as the job to be done, but is this actually the job to be done? Let's talk about why the customer might be in that situation or not be in that situation. Or I think the job to be done might actually be something else.

(00:37:43):
Or you might say, hey, the job to be done is maybe an early day version would be the job to be done is to get an offer from Opendoor. And it's like, well kind of, but the broader job to be done might be price discovery for the customer. And so you can have a rich conversation where it's like, well, one might be a little bit influenced by our business goals. I don't think you just run around and people are like, yeah, I'm going to sell my house, but my goal is to get an offer from Opendoor. And so that's like, okay, the template might be the same, but it's actually the content that takes a little bit of cultural instantiation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:21):
Got it. And it sounds like people talk from what is the job to be done that feels like a core part of the way you think about it. What is the job to be done? Just that language alone feels really powerful. Is there a resource or a book that you point people to help your team learn about the jobs to be done work? Is there one thing you find useful?

Brian Tolkin (00:38:38):
Not about jobs to be done. I do a lot more pointing people towards internal examples of where I saw other PMs maybe do as well or blogs and stuff. But your blog is a column when we pass around, not about jobs to done, but just about many topics.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:56):
I'm flattered. Thank you.

Brian Tolkin (00:38:58):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:58):
I really appreciate that. I was also thinking as you were talking, you're friends with Kayvon and jobs to be done on Twitter was quite the journey for them, traumatic for a lot of people. I think it went very far to the extreme of the-

Brian Tolkin (00:39:11):
Yeah. I think they're more dogmatic about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:13):
Very dramatic. And so I guess it's a lesson here, maybe don't take it that far.

Brian Tolkin (00:39:19):
Yeah. And I think it probably, and I don't know if Kayvon would agree with this, I imagine he would, the generalized version of you pick the right framework for the right job and if you say there's one framework to rule them all and this is the only framework that works and then of course every problem into it, then we chop.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:38):
The way I think about jobs to be done is exactly the way you're describing it where it's just think from the lens of the job to be done for our customers. So for my newsletter, what is the job to be done of my newsletter to help you become better at your job as a product person building product. And that actually ends up being really helpful. And it feels like that's the way you guys think about it at opening.

Brian Tolkin (00:39:57):
Yeah, absolutely. And you're crushing it by the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:00):
Thank you. So are you. You talked about, I'm going to go into another question to deflect your compliment. You mentioned that Uber, there's a million transactions happening every second, it's massive scale. Opendoor is completely different. You have very few very large transactions. Yeah. I'm curious how you do experiments, if you do experiments, do you do A/B tests? What have you learned about just how to think through low sample sizes plus A/B testing?

Brian Tolkin (00:40:29):
Yeah, very hot topic of conversation. We do A/B test. It is obviously the gold standard. And so we do as much as we can. Of A/B testing there are parts of our funnel and flow that have more volume than others. So top of quality testing easier than down funnels, A/B testing purely product or tech features easier than A/B testing processes, operational processes. But you're totally right. We are not doing hundreds of millions of transactions a year. And so experimentation can be more challenging. And so I think one way to think about it is A, acknowledge the problem, which just to say don't, and we've made this mistake many, many times, but don't just force yourself into A/B testing without running the power analysis and say like, hey, are we going to get results? What is the size that will detect and what is the runtime of that experiment?

(00:41:39):
And be honest, is that acceptable? A second lesson here, is there certain experiments that are important enough and it's hard to triangulate signal in any other way that you may say a six-month runtime is an acceptable outcome and we are going to start it in June and we will be smarter for it for 2025 planning and we're going to set it and forget it and we're grateful we did, and that's okay. But the only mistake here is thinking you'll get an answer in a month when you won't, and then pretending you do and then waking up a month later and being like, "Well, it was insignificant and this and that." We could have known that. And then the third thing is, and experimentation is all about increasing your conviction in the problem or the solution. So the generalized version of the statement is, if there are parts of your funnel or flow that are low end and you can't run a canonical A/B test, how might you otherwise increase your conviction in the solution that you're building?

(00:42:47):
And there turns out there are a decent number of other ways to do that. The first best, most obvious is talk to more customers. But there are other statistical techniques that again, aren't as rigorous or good, but may be possible. You may be able to use observational data, you review with diff and diff, you may be able to look at sister cities or twin cities. You may be able to segment by geo, you may be able to reduce your power and say, hey, we're going to run at 80% confidence for all of our experiments instead of this traditional 95% because that's a worthy trade-off. And if we're wrong one more time out of 10, that's okay.

(00:43:28):
You can do a long-term holdout to match your intuition. And so there's a lot of other techniques to hone your intuition. There's a lot of other techniques to build conviction and confidence. And so we try to be very creative on doing that. And then the last bit I would say is if you're not going to get significance, if there's no other techniques at your disposal, then sometimes you just got to trust your intuition and ship it. And if that's what you believe, then that's what you believed and you shouldn't spend time trying to get false precision.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:01):
I want to spend more time on that last point, but real quick, the power analysis you talked about, there's people, don't know, there's calculators out there that you could just plug in, here's how much traffic I'm getting, here's how much of an impact difference I want to see, here's how long it'll take to find out.

Brian Tolkin (00:44:17):
Yep, exactly. Totally. And some of the calculators are great where you can also plug in the traffic and your acceptable runtime and it will tell you the minimum detectable impact and then you can gut check your own intuition. So you can play around with that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:31):
Awesome. We'll try to link to one of those in the show notes. So, on the intuition piece, is there anything more there? Just like how you think about when you run the product team, just how you recommend people leverage intuition versus not. Because some companies are like, we're just going to trust the data. I don't really trust your opinion. You don't know this customer exactly. You talked about Opendoor, I'm not buying houses myself, so I don't know how much I can trust my intuition. Just what's your general advice to your product team of how to think about their intuition and when to rely on it versus not?

Brian Tolkin (00:45:06):
So, at Opendoor, for example, I'd say on the relative spectrum, we're quite data-driven. And then it's when we come into this challenge where we say, okay, that is another technique or tool in the toolbox. I think the generalized version of that is customers, products, people can surprise you. And so this happens all the time for people who build products. I'm sure you've got great stories from Airbnb where you saw something, put it out there just was very-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:35):
All the time.

Brian Tolkin (00:45:36):
All the time. And so I think there's definitely a humility to say if you can, if it's relatively easy to test your assumptions or test your hypotheses. That is always better to gut check yourself. And that takes a little bit of humility to say that, but we've all been wrong plenty of times. But if that's just not on the table, I think the reality is you can't pretend it is. And sometimes you got to use taste and judgment and then you say, okay, what is my conviction level and do I have just medium, low or high conviction? And if I have anything low or medium conviction and it's a decision of consequence, I should talk to more customers, check it with another person and see if their intuition matches. Something that gets me personally to the high bucket category.

(00:46:27):
And then I think the last part, which is some part of experimentation is if you just ship something because it's your intuition or it's where you want to see the product go, do you have a reasonable feedback loop to understand whether or not you are correct? So that could be customer support or ticket volume or feature adoption, whatever the case is, it may not be an output metric in the traditional A/B test, but some more rigorous system that says, hey, I had this hypothesis, we just shipped it for x, y, z constraint reason for red.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:04):
I think that's awesome advice. I agree with everything you're saying. You mentioned this word humility, and it is a good segue to something I want to talk about, which is Zillow. One of the most interesting things that's happened in your space is Zillow basically decided, hey, we're just going to do what Opendoor is doing, they launched it, you're basically frenemies for a while, and then they're like, no, it's not working. Now you partner and now you work with Zillow on this stuff. So are you able to share what went down there with the story of what happened, how it went, and where things are at now?

Brian Tolkin (00:47:36):
Yeah, I mean we do partner with Zillow. Zillow's been a fantastic partner for us and we've really enjoyed a working relationship with them. I think when you think about it, they have tremendous amount of reach and audience and all these online platforms have tremendous reach and audience. And we happen to have a fairly unique selling solution. And so there's a nice, not to use a business school word, but there's a nice synergy so to speak, between a high intended audience who's doing a lot of browsing and searching and discovery and starting their process on one of these online platforms and what we offer, which is transaction services that allow people to actually move particularly on the seller side. And so there's just a pretty nice symbiotic relationship there with the Zillow's and the regimens of the world. And so both of those have been great partners for us.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:43):
What do you think Zillow maybe underestimated or didn't get about the space that made it harder than they anticipated? That seems obvious. Of course, let's go down funnel, let's just do it all. And they're like, "Oh, shit, not working." What do you think they didn't get or what do you think they missed?

Brian Tolkin (00:48:58):
I guess continuing on the humility point, I won't necessarily pretend to be in their shoes, but I will say the business is challenging and it's complex from a number of different dimensions. It's not a traditional software only product, but you have to be really good at pricing. You have to be really good at product, you have to be really good at the operations. You have to be really disciplined at risk. You have to be really good in the capital markets. And so you have to put all of these functions together to build a vertically integrated product. And that's the reality. And so that is something that's been in Opendoor's DNA from day one because we started with a vertically integrated product. And so we can't deliver unless we have all of those things. Right? And so I think that's something that continues to help us to this day, is that vertical integration requires all of those pieces coming together.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:53):
That makes a lot of sense, and I think it's a good reminder of there are adjacent markets and businesses that always feel like, "Oh, we could expand to that someday." Such a big opportunity, this business could be so much bigger. And then you realize your business is completely not set up to operate this way. Zillow is very software driven, just I am not going to simplify what they do, but it's a website, very software. And obviously as we talked about Opendoor, a huge operational component. And then as you said, the pricing piece and the debt stuff.

Brian Tolkin (00:50:24):
Yeah. Yeah, totally. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:26):
Yeah. So I think it's a really good reminder that just when you're taking on something completely different, it may not fit into the way your company operates and partnering makes sense. Anything else there that's interesting to share around the Zillow thing? I guess one is maybe it was just like, I imagine it was very stressful. Zillow's getting into it. "Oh, shit what are we going to do? They got all the traffic." Yeah, anything there?

Brian Tolkin (00:50:46):
Yeah. I mean, it's certainly stressful. I think in general we try to live by whether Zillow or anybody else being competition aware, but not necessarily competition focused. And the reality is vast, vast in our space. A vast majority of people still move the traditional way. And so this isn't something where it's like the size of the prize isn't particularly large enough short or anything like that. The reality is it's the largest asset classroom in the United States, and if we just stay super focused on, hey, who are the customers that we serve really well that we talk to every day, there's a little bit of confidence that comes from being able to stay focused on that regardless of the competitive environment, again, because it's not like the market is fully saturated.

(00:51:40):
This is the same thing back in the Uber days as well. It's like transportation is almost infinitely large. And so, yes, it feels like there's heated competition between Uber and Lester or whatever back in the day, but the reality is there's plenty of trips that happens and people need to get around sitting in plenty of different ways. That's neither Uber and more Lyft. And staying focused on how you can develop for your customer, I think is the best way to focus.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:11):
There's a podcast that will come out before this episode with Jeff Weinstein from Stripe who's building Stripe Atlas. They had a similar experience with AngelList launched a direct competitor to Atlas, and then they realized Atlas is so much better. Forget it. We're just going to send everyone to Atlas.

Brian Tolkin (00:52:29):
Really?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:30):
Yes. And I think it's the same exact lesson that if you just stay focused on jobs to be done, let's say, of what is the job to be done and do the best possible job, and knowing that the market is much bigger, that you're not really competing with someone else, another company, it's the default behavior in your case. It's like people are just buying their house the old-fashioned way. That's the actual competition.

Brian Tolkin (00:52:51):
Exactly. Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:53):
Yeah. Okay. So, along these lines, something else I've heard that you're very good at is staying very calm under pressure and staying very levelheaded when things are really crazy. This is something that a lot of people are not good at, especially leaders. They stress everyone out things. You go crazy, they don't create a good vibe. And then two, something people want to get better. Leaders and non-leader are like any lessons, anything you've learned about just how to develop this skill?

Brian Tolkin (00:53:18):
I think part of this may have been sharpened in the early days of Uber. Everything felt like a fire drill all the time. So the only way to operate, but I think you almost hit the nail on the head in the question, which is a little bit of an intellectual answer of when you reflect the stress onto your teams, everybody tenses up and tightens up. And so it counterintuitively doesn't produce better outcomes. And so I think the other reality to remind ourselves, and these are a bunch of mantras that just are helpful in these moments, is you're never as good as you think you are. You're never as bad as you think you are. And so that more even keeled demeanor, I think allows you to have a clearer head when you're operating under the pressure and to think more clearly.

(00:54:14):
I think one of the maybe least helpful answers, but unfortunately, the reality is you got to be in some stressful situations to also have the perspective that cycles past the things past. And that remaining calm is what matters. And so maybe the advice there is reflecting on one of these situations happen, exposing yourself to them, not running from them and then learning from them so that the next time it comes around you can say, Hey, I've been here before. I've slept on the floor in China before launching uberPOOL and thinking we're going to miss a launch deadline. And what were the tools in my toolbox and my toolkit that showed me that in terms of getting it done or not, and what were the lessons?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:06):
I love that. So part of it is just go through this experience many times and you'll start to realize, okay, it's not actually going to be as bad as people may think. You mentioned this toolkit instead of tools. Is there anything else there that you come back to that ends up being helpful? You mentioned this mantra of it's never as bad as people think it is, it is never great as people think it is.

Brian Tolkin (00:55:23):
Yeah, I mean, I think exposing yourself to other people's stories or however you may learn is really, really helpful. So again, whether it's your podcast or books or biographies or one of the podcasts that I love is Founders Podcast, which talks about historical famous entrepreneurs. And obviously these are elevating very famous people already, but there's a lot to learn from a lot of these stories as well and understanding that the journey in pack is nonlinear, it never is for anybody. And so I think being able to expose yourself to other stories that even may if you don't have those personal experiences and then understanding how others navigate.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:11):
Got it. So just hearing of other people's crazy experiences and building on this muscle of like, okay, they've gone through crazy stuff, things work out.

Brian Tolkin (00:56:18):
Yeah, totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:20):
We'll make it through. Okay. I have this note here that I think either someone mentioned about you or you may have mentioned that product is finding the kernel of truth in a sea of ambiguity and signals. Does that mean anything to you?

Brian Tolkin (00:56:33):
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I think in most organizations and to do the job effectively, you're going to get signals from everywhere and good ideas come from everywhere. It may be your CS team or CX team. It may be a customer directly. It may be a conversation you had. It may be a YouTube video you watched that sparked an idea. It may be feedback from an executive, it may be whatever. You went out and did a field visit. You are going to get a lot of inputs around what people think about your product, what people think you should do next. And I think that the core job is to understand what really matters, right? What is noise? What is a good idea, what is a suggestion and what is back to the jobs to be done for what is really going to move the customer forward?

(00:57:24):
And unfortunately that means saying no to maybe what sounds like some good ideas along the way, but if you can really figure out this is really what matters, that's the core part of the job. It dovetails even back to our earlier conversation. In the early days of building tech and ops companies is where's the tech leverage? Same question, where's the kernel of what really matters that tech can uniquely solve? And let's go do that and be comfortable with other fires maybe burning. That's what really, really, really matters. It's a hard discipline.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:02):
I love that. If there's not an example, that's totally fine, but when you talk about this finding this kernel where tech could be highly leveraged, is there any example that comes to mind of that working out really well?

Brian Tolkin (00:58:13):
I mean, I think back in the Uber days, I think it was like, hey, we're not going to build sophisticated tooling infrastructure. We're not going to build a centralized growth team. We're not going to build any of that. Because if you think about the early Uber network from the simplest form, you've got a rider and a driver and you need to connect them, price the transaction and issue some receipts probably and collect payment. So it's like, okay, do we do that really well? And until we do that really well, all the other stuff is noise. It's immaterial how efficiently we answer support tickets. That's not critical. And so now it's super critical, but in the early days it's not that critical. And even the customer acquisition costs may not be super critical, in this case it's growing rapidly on the things. And so pouring fuel on the fire may not be super efficient there.

(00:59:13):
So I think that's a very good generalized example. One other tip that maybe is helpful that I frankly constantly work on and try to get better at is all these ideas and feedback that comes from everywhere, make sure it's written down for a number of reasons. One, you can then go reference it, but two, part of the job is making sure the people who present those ideas are heard and respected and know that it's at least somewhere where it was considered. And then you can look at it all and say, okay, but what actually really, really, really, really matters here? And yeah, that's another tip.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:55):
When you say written down, is there tools you find really helpful here? Is it just put it in a big doc that we're keeping? Is there anything you find to actually operationalize that?

Brian Tolkin (01:00:03):
I've seen different companies do it differently, but wherever you tend to try and keep a backlog, whether that's a Google sheet or your actual backlog in Jira, whatever you use, but at least it feels like, okay, the context was captured, and the idea is there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:19):
Awesome. Okay. I'm going to take us to a recurring segment on this podcast called Failure Corner.

Brian Tolkin (01:00:25):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:26):
Is there a story you can share of a time you failed in your career had a big failure, and how that experience made you better?

Brian Tolkin (01:00:35):
We can talk about the very early days of uberPOOL, and the first launch, if you will in San Francisco. So, carpooling product, multiple riders in a Mercedes car. And we had this idea that it would be effective for commuters, this was very, very early days. And so part of the launch was, okay, we're going to beta it with just some popular commuting corridors with specific companies or maybe the marina to Google or whatever and try and match people according to what their companies and that's how we'll drive liquidity. And we very quickly realized that back to what the kernel of truth is here is liquidity is the only thing that matters. And there just wasn't enough. There was never going to be enough to do this company based thing. That wasn't the strategy that was going towards from us. And so the reason I don't know if it's a full failure is maybe this is true all failures, you learn from it, you pivot and you go on to the next thing.

(01:01:52):
And obviously we did that and then spent a lot of our time and effort trying to say, okay, what are the bounds of liquidity and driving liquidity that we can do to understand what the most important or what the limits of the product are. So as an example, we launched and maybe people in San Francisco. Remember this $5 anywhere in San Francisco, we work for promotion, which is obviously a great deal, obviously costs a lot of money, but the whole idea here is like, oh, okay, if liquidity is what really matters, if we were to juice that and really drive liquidity, how high can our metrics get? And then we can go chase more sustainable ways to do that. But it was a interesting fail case from launching and learning to say, hey, this initial strategy just isn't going to work, we got to go. And any part of it was a hedging strategy where with a small audience and there'll be a beta population, it's like, well, this one you just got to go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:51):
I think a lesson there is also don't overthink it, don't try to get too cute. Just like we're trying to make a perfect beta test versus realizing, okay, we just need a lot more people in it. Also, your $5 promotion made me think of the early promotions of the ice cream and the bunnies delivery and all that stuff.

Brian Tolkin (01:03:13):
Yeah. That was by the way, a example of fully distributed, the benefit of having those early Petri dishes. Someone a local marketing manager like, Hey, this would be fun. Yeah, that would be really fun. The platform can support it. And those promotions were fantastic. And it started out, I can't remember if the first one was ice cream or puppies, I think it was ice cream. But yeah, branched into all sorts of stuff. Boats, ice cream, puppies, kittens, I think, and all credit goes to local ideas of inspiration just being focused on trying to grow within.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:56):
I love that we've circled back to the beginning of our conversation, product and ops working together, the benefits of both. Before we get to a very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that you wanted to share? Any last nuggets of wisdom that you think might be useful to people when they're trying to build product companies teams?

Brian Tolkin (01:04:13):
This was great. We covered quite a bit of ground. I think the only, I don't know if this is a generalized wisdom, but something I've been thinking about as my career has progressed a little bit, especially building out proper organizations, especially as more tools come online, it's very clear that there's different types of PMs and we spent a lot of time talking about once we can operate in the physical and the digital or the product and operations worlds. But even within that, there's more technical PMs who grew up in minute engineering discipline. There are people who came from ops and there are people who came from design and grew up in a more user experience background.

(01:05:01):
And one thing that I've been moved on as is build out the team is thinking similar to a product roadmap is it's not really about is this person good or bad or whatever, it's is this person's skillset and context to the problem that is really needed. And so back to that conversation on, hey, where do we get tech leverage? It's like, Hey, is this person who has this unique skillset as a PM for this problem type? I don't know if that's helpful, but it's something I've been spending a lot of time thinking about, especially this view job posting niche view product manager. Or it's actually like, well, how can we be a little bit more thoughtful about what the actual skillset needs off this type of team?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:47):
Awesome. It's like a person product fit.

Brian Tolkin (01:05:50):
There you go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:50):
And I think it's because a lot of companies hire generalists and they're just like, we'll hire someone smart, ambitious, and with experience and general experience and then we'll put them on different things. So I think these are two different philosophies and it probably makes a lot of sense for an Opendoor with very unique type of business, with very specific skills that are necessary to be really good there. Okay, amazing. Brian, with this, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Brian Tolkin (01:06:16):
Let's do it. Can't wait.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:17):
Let's do it. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Brian Tolkin (01:06:23):
Shoe dog, Black Swan, Design of Everyday Things, and for a fun one, Shawn Theron.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:36):
Amazing. Four books for the price of two to three. I love it.

Brian Tolkin (01:06:40):
Apologies. I'll stick to the rules.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:42):
No, no, there's no rules. There are no rules.

Brian Tolkin (01:06:45):
There you go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:46):
Next question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Brian Tolkin (01:06:50):
I like the sports docu ones on Netflix, so Full Swing, Drive to Survive, Break Points, tennis, golf, F1, all of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:02):
And wasn't there that Nike documentary recently with Ben Affleck?

Brian Tolkin (01:07:05):
There is, which I have not seen. So if it's good, I don't know if that's a recommendation or just an acknowledgement.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:12):
It's worth watching. If you like Shoe Dog, I feel like you'd enjoy it. It was entertaining Michael Jordan, things like that. Next question, do you have a favorite product that you have recently discovered that you really love?

Brian Tolkin (01:07:24):
So we just got a puppy and we are about to have our first child. And so all of my purchases recently are puppies and children focused. My buddy gifted us the Phi collar for our dog, and so we've been really enjoying that. Another one as I'm getting busier for news and stuff is Particle, which is a great news aggravation tool, AI news tool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:54):
Cavan's wife's business. I am a huge fan, actually I think it just came out of beta and now it's like a full app that anyone can download. I just actually installed it yesterday again and I love it. I get these pushes every few... I don't know, it's like a couple of times a day of just like, here's what's happening. Also, congratulations I should have said on your pending child.

Brian Tolkin (01:08:16):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:17):
Lucky for you. I have a newsletter post with all the products you should buy, it's called New Parent Gift Guide for Product Managers.

Brian Tolkin (01:08:24):
Love it. I will definitely probably buy all of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:30):
If you don't already have them all. And now everyone's probably sending you their spreadsheets of all their favorite stuff there.

Brian Tolkin (01:08:30):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:35):
Okay, next question. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to share with people either in work or life?

Brian Tolkin (01:08:41):
Well, mostly just stay curious.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:44):
Stay curious. I love it. Two more questions. Who has most influenced you in the course of your career?

Brian Tolkin (01:08:54):
One of the people who inspired me very early on in my product journey. I've been fortunate to have a number of very good mentors and obviously we talked about earlier while I was founders of books or me a lot from other people's journey. But one person who was personally important to me early in my product journey and very supportive of this guy named Jeff Holden, who was the chief product officer at Uber back in the day, and is like a young PM transferring into product really took me under his wing. And I think I'm forever grateful for that, for Jeff, for helping grow my career, but also try to pay it forward a little bit in terms of people who are going in the career. That was really meaningful for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:42):
Last question. I hear that your interview at Uber was pretty wild. Can you tell that story?

Brian Tolkin (01:09:48):
Yeah, I can. So, long story short, I was starting a company my senior spring before graduation and we had to go our separate ways. So I hadn't done traditional recruiting ever. And my buddy called me up and was like, "Hey, we're looking for smart, hardworking people at this Uber thing. Are you interested?" And quick side note, I had actually done some very early diligence work on these taxi apps back in 2011, looking at the time was Uber Cab and Cabilis and Taxi Manage can probably names nothing these days. And so I knew what Uber was and so I said, "Yeah, sure, I would love to." And so I had the first round of interview went well, and they said, great. And at that stage is come on onsite, the full enchilada one works, and this was post-graduation and was helping out some companies but didn't have a full-time job.

(01:10:51):
So I said, hey, I'm pretty flexible. How about next Tuesday? I said, great. So we scheduled it and then on Friday or Saturday or over the weekend I looked, I'm like, oh, Tuesday's, July 4th. I scheduled my interview for July 4th. And so I called my buddy and I'm like, hey, I am so sorry. I don't want to make people in on July 4th. Should I cancel? Should I reach out? Everyone's accepted. Whatever you do, do not cancel your interview. Like, okay, I'll be there on July 4th. And so I went in to the office on July 4th and there was a very small handful of people there. It was actually launching that day, was launching Uber's second ever product type, which was Uber SUV. And I had this, I think it was probably five hour gauntlet interview on July 4th from noon to five and missed my July 4th barbecue. And it was quite the experience, but I think maybe set the stage for some of the early days chaos. I'm very glad I didn't cancel the interview.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:58):
And was Travis involved in that interview or is it just-

Brian Tolkin (01:11:59):
Travis was involved in the interview. She was one of the... I think there were four or five people, and the two who were generally guiding my interview process and Travis and one other person starting that day. And part of the gauntlet interview was a simulation of the job, if you will. And so some of that was building some novels on the computers and some of it was writing potential emails to drivers and if she had the driver come in and you did chat, so I was in this room by myself typing away on the first part, which was building the model. And I hear him knock on the door and Travis comes in and he just sits down and says, "Hi, I'm Travis." I don't know who you are, but I'm Brian, and we have a 45-minute chat, or maybe it's been about half hour, 45 minutes. And clearly I'm not producing the work that I'm supposed to of the interview.

(01:12:59):
I'm supposed to be building this model. I'm supposed to email it back to the person who sent it to me. Clearly I've done nothing chatting with the CEO. And I hear a knock on the door and the door opens and the person sees that I'm talking to Travis, "Oh, continue, continue" and it was very good. Also, pretty intense conversation with Travis that definitely set the expectations working there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:24):
And clearly worked out. And Travis was happy. Is what-

Brian Tolkin (01:13:28):
I hope so.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:28):
... I imagine.

Brian Tolkin (01:13:29):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:30):
Amazing. Brian, thank you so much for being here. We went through everything that I was hoping to get through. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online, and is there anything you want them to check out that you might be up to? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Brian Tolkin (01:13:44):
Super kind. They can find me online on Twitter, LinkedIn, both just Brian Tolkin, my name. In terms of being useful, if you have a home to sell, feel free to go on to Opendoor. More importantly, if you have feedback on the product, but would love to hear it. Otherwise, any feedback on what people liked or would love to learn more about from what we chatted about would be super great. So I'd love to hear from you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:09):
Brian, thank you so much for being here.

Brian Tolkin (01:14:12):
Lenny, I really appreciate it. This was great. Bye everyone.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:16):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Casey Winters (00:00):
The goal of your Kindle strategies, these like non-scalable hacks, they only exist to unlock the fire strategies, to unlock the things that could take you to millions of users.

Lenny (00:12):
Pinterest, Airbnb, Reddit, Canva, Hipcamp, Thumbtack, Fair, Tinder, Eventbrite. What do these companies have in common? Casey Winters, Casey has worked with and advised more consumer companies on their product and growth strategy than anyone in the world. He's also very generous with his time and often sets time aside to help founders and product leaders. I always learned so much talking to Casey, and I'm excited for you to hear this episode. In our chat we covered Casey's advice on making trade offs as a product leader, justifying non-sexy product investments, the spectrum of product people and how to level up your skills, new growth trends and tactics that he's seeing, when to focus on growth, and a bunch of advice on growth strategy, and so many other things. As a bonus, we're going to be doing a live AMA with Casey in my newsletter Slack community on August 5th at 10:00 AM Pacific time, so if you'd like to ask Casey any questions, make sure to get there. Until then enjoy this episode with Casey Winters. Hey Casey Winters, what do you love about Coda?

Casey Winters (01:19):
Coda's a company that's actually near and dear to my heart because I got to work on their launch when I was at Greylock. But in terms of what I love about it, I love loops and Coda has some of the coolest and most useful content loops I've seen. How the loop works is someone can create a Coda and share it publicly for the world. This can be how you create LKRs, run annual planning, build your roadmap, whatever. Every one of those codas can then be easily copied and adapted to your organization without knowing who originally even wrote it, so they're embedding the sharing of best practices of scaling companies into their core product and growth loops, which is something I'm personally passionate about.

Lenny (01:56):
I actually use Coda myself every day, it's kind of the center of my writing and podcasting operation. I use it for first drafts, to organize my content calendar, to plan each podcast episode, and so many more things. Coda's giving listeners of this podcast $1,000 in free credit off their first statement, just go to coda.io/lenny. That's coda.io/lenny.

(02:22):
This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel, offering powerful self-serve product analytics. Something we talk a lot about on the show is how startups can build successful and amazing products. And relying on gut feeling is a really expensive way to find out if you're heading in the right direction, especially when you're raising money, because VCs don't want to pay the price for these kinds of mistakes. That's why Mixpanel will give you $50,000 in credits when you join their startup program. With Mixpanel, startups find product market fit faster, helping you take your company from minimal viable product to the next unicorn. Access realtime insights with the help of their pre-built templates, and know that at every stage Mixpanel is helping you build with confidence and curiosity for free. Apply for the startup program today to claim your $50,000 in credits at mixpanel.com/startups with an S, and even if you're not a startup Mixpanel has pricing plans for teams of every size. Grow your business like you've always imagined with Mixpanel.

(03:26):
Casey, welcome to the pod. I feel like every time that we chat, I leave with at least one new perspective that kind of blew my mind on product, or growth, or even just the world. And so I'm really excited to have this conversation mostly to selfishly extract as much knowledge out of your head as I can in the hour that we have together. And so with that welcome.

Casey Winters (03:50):
Very kind, happy to be here.

Lenny (03:52):
You've worked at so many iconic companies and worked with so many iconic companies. It almost boggles the mind just looking at your LinkedIn, trying to scroll through LinkedIn and you have to click on, see additional experiences. And there's just so many places you've worked, so many companies you've worked with. Could you just give listeners maybe a 10,000 foot view of your career arc through product and growth?

Casey Winters (04:15):
Well, I started my career as an analyst at apartments.com on the marketing side, so it was my job to measure every channel for effectiveness in driving leads. These are things like SEO, AdWords, affiliate marketing email, so once I got good at measuring that I naturally started working on optimizing those channels directly. And then I started going to do user research and understand how the product could be better so that we could convert leads better. And it was at that point that I got the feedback from the company that I was this weird marketing and product hybrid, and they didn't really know what to do with that, because those were two totally separate departments. It wasn't until I got to GrubHub and I was the 15th employee and they were like, dude, we don't care.

(05:01):
As long as you grow how many people order food, I don't care if you work on marketing, I don't care if you change the product, do whatever we'll have results. And we now call these roles growth, but that term didn't exist at the time, so I basically worked on growing the demand side of that business from Series A to IPO. We ended up creating a product management function out of my team there, but for the first four years we didn't have product titles either. That was kind of a newer idea, also. It wasn't until I went to Pinterest that I was actually formally labeled a product person.

(05:37):
I ended up leading the growth product team there. We basically had to rebuild the growth model of the business to reignite growth, so I was there from 40 million MAU to 150 million MAU. And it was around that time that I started doing some more advising with Airbnb on the demand side, with Pocket. And then I went to a VC named Greylock Partners and worked with their companies on growth and scaling. And then I just independently started working as a full-time advisor with companies like Eventbrite, Tinder, Thumbtack, Canva. And after doing that for a couple years, Eventbrite opened this chief product officer role and they asked me to take it, so now I've been doing that for three years now.

Lenny (06:18):
That's an excellent segue to our next little segment that I want to get into, which is partly your CPO role and the work that you do there. And also touching a bit on a bit of the writing that you've done. You're currently a chief product officer at Eventbrite, which is a company that I love, I have so many friends there and they're all amazing, such a big fan of the company. And I know a lot of listeners are maybe thinking about becoming CPO someday as a goal.

Casey Winters (06:18):
Yep.

Lenny (06:43):
And so I thought it'd be cool to chat through some of the challenges that you're having and some of the things you've learned in the role.

Casey Winters (06:49):
Sure.

Lenny (06:50):
Cool.

Casey Winters (06:50):
Yeah.

Lenny (06:51):
I'll be more specific, so one of the things that you mentioned that you're working on is thinking about trade offs and being very explicit about trade offs you're making, communicating why you made certain trade offs and then just generally communicating that upward to executives and then across the company, so I'm curious just to hear what you've learned around how to communicate trade offs and internal communication?

Casey Winters (07:11):
Yeah, one of the things I found, especially during the pandemic at Eventbrite, where we weren't obviously hiring a lot of people and we had lots of various issues come up, is that a lot of managers and leaders would just try to deal with issues on their own and not raise them or escalate them with me in particular. And some of these were really tough situations, so then later on, I'd ask why something went wrong or why we didn't achieve a goal. And I get some feedback from my team of like, Hey, you don't understand the situation. This is really impossible. There's all these things going wrong. And then I respond. Yeah, of course I don't understand this situation because you haven't told me about it. How am I supposed to evaluate things fairly if you don't let me know what's really going on, so these people on my team thought that being a leader was handling it the best they could given the circumstances when in many cases the right way is to escalate the issue so that perhaps I could help them change the circumstances, so the circumstances aren't as dire.

(08:14):
And if I can't change the circumstances, I'm at least aware of the circumstances and the explicit trade off we've made to deal with that situation. And then I can help communicate that better to others across the company, and I can help evaluate the results with the proper context and do it more fairly. I find that in general people just way under communicate upward inside of companies. And then they'll complain that executives are out of touch when they aren't telling executives what the executives need to know. Then when people inside a company do try to communicate upward a lot of times they're so in the weeds that as an executive, I just don't understand what they're saying. And then when I ask questions it's like as an exec, I'm asking a question in another language. It's like I don't know if you've ever seen Ocean's Twelve, but as a joke, they invite Matt Damon to this business meeting and they just talk in code as a prank on him.

(09:14):
And that's what a lot of people on my team feel sometimes when they're talking to the executives of like, I don't even understand what these questions mean. It's like you're speaking another language. One of the ways I try to frame it to my team is if you're not an executive, whatever you're working on, you're basically writing and telling a story. And when you talk to an exec about that story, you have to start with chapter one, which is what part of the company strategy are you working on? What metrics are you trying to improve? What assumptions are you making that are guiding what you're building? And I find that many times when non-executives are presenting to execs, they'll start on like chapter six, so even if that part of the story is right, it's like a good story. You haven't earned the right to tell that part of the story yet because you skipped the first five chapters. And I've definitely seen people with the opposite problem as well, which I call starting at the beginning of the time where you come into a meeting with the CEO or with the CFO or something.

(10:20):
And you basically spend the first 20 minutes, re-explaining the company strategy or who our customer is or something that everyone already knows. And then by the time you get to explaining new information, you've used up your allotted time, so I try to coach my team to be in the middle. Like don't start on chapter six of the story, but also don't start with a textbook on the English language either. You want to find the last point in your story, that would be completely obvious to the person you're telling the story to, and then go from there to things that would be less obvious, but that they can follow along with. And it's a lot of work to really dial that in across different types of people you're trying to communicate that story to because of course, upward communication isn't all that you're doing, right? You're trying to communicate that down to your team, to individual engineers and designers, and they're going to need to hear some very different things then say the CPO of the company, or the CEO of the company, so it's a challenge I see quite frequently.

Lenny (11:19):
Can you talk a bit about how you actually coach PMs on this? Is this like in one-on-ones you revisit a presentation they gave that could have been better? Is it after a presentation, you pull them aside and talk through what they could have done better. How do you approach that?

Casey Winters (11:33):
Well, I think the best way to coach is actually to do it before the meeting, so I think there's a tendency in product management and product design to want to do meetings where there's kind of this big reveal and an aha to the audience. And it's kind of the opposite of how you want to handle most of these situations. You want to de-risk that meeting not make it a big success or fail moment, so there's a few things that I do. One is if there is a big presentation coming up or something like that, I try to run through it with the team, pretending to be the other members of the audience that are going to be there, so I'll say, okay, well, what the CFO's going to ask about here is X. And you want to answer that question before it gets asked. What Julia, our CEO is going to ask about is why, so you want to weave that into the early story and not wait for her to ask.

(12:28):
You kind of role play the entire thing based on the different people that they're going to be communicating with. Something I commonly say is that executive communication is actually executives communication. You're communicating with individual executives that all have different styles and different concerns about the business or about the particular problem you're working on. And you want to anticipate that, and if you don't have enough experience say presenting to the CFO or the CEO, I as the chief product officer do, so I can impersonate them and help you understand what they're going to care most about. The other thing that I push a lot of my team to do is have pre-meetings with some of those key individuals, so that they're going to be less surprised in the meeting about what you're talking about, that you've gotten any major concerns brought to your attention before the big meeting.

(13:18):
And that helps de-risk how poorly a meeting like that can go, so definitely at the individual presentation level, doing that pre-meeting. What I'm working on a lot now is trying to have more of a scaled approach to training this type of upward communication. And what types of frameworks, what types of structure tend to work for Eventbrite and making sure that everyone on my team is just really well versed in that and comfortable in it because of course, confidence projection is a key part of these types of meetings as well.

Lenny (13:54):
This is such important advice that I think a lot of PMs don't recognize how important it is to prepare for important meetings like this. Just to give folks context, maybe that aren't doing this sort of thing when they're working at a larger company, how much time do you spend or an ICPM should spend on preparing for these things just to set a little bit of a reference point?

Casey Winters (14:13):
Well, it's an interesting question because I think different people have different styles on how they want to handle this. I'd say the way my brain works in these situations which I think is a little bit atypical, is I'm actually a little bit better if I am free forming a lot of elements and just speaking from confidence in areas I know versus specifically trying to lay out every exact bullet point I want to hit. I'm going to show up as more comfortable, I'm going to show up as more dynamic, and I'm going to be able to engage in a more thoughtful conversation, so for me, my approach to these sorts of things is I write a lot. I write a lot of notes. I write a lot of documents. And then in general, for any of these types of communications, I am just pulling from things I know deeply because I've written them down, I've thought a lot about them.

(15:10):
For a lot of other people they really just need to spend a lot of time on prep to make sure they nail the communication they want to nail. And I found it requires a different amount of investment for different people on my team, so the point is not as much how much time you spend, it's how well do you really know the material, and how well do you really know what your audience is going to care about with that material so that you are prepared for every question you might get. I'll give an example from my Pinterest days, the primary way with which you interfaced on any key strategic topic was product review, right? You'd go in and you talk to Ben, our CEO and Jack our head of product. And Ben and Jack had very different styles of communication. Jack in particular would very early on ask a few different data questions to get context on the problem. And if you, as a product leader or an individual PM or an individual designer didn't know the answers to any of those, it cast doubt on the entire rest of that meeting.

(16:17):
Because, the team wouldn't be confident that you had all the right context to understand the problem, so a lot of what I would coach my team on is, okay, I'm pretty confident Jack's going to ask this question, then this question, then this question. Based on the material I'm seeing from you, how well are you prepared to answer those questions? Different execs might be somewhat different in that regard, but if you haven't thought through all the questions that might be asked from the document that you're sharing or the presentation you're about to present, you're not prepared enough, right. You need to know the entire universe of how that meeting can go. And that may take you dozens of hours, it might take you three hours, but the most important thing is that you've asked what possible questions can be asked and am I prepared to answer all of those? Do I have all the data in front of me to answer all of those? But because if I don't the chances of the meeting you're having a negative outcome just increased dramatically.

Lenny (17:17):
I imagine some people are listening to this and they're like, holy shit, I need to spend this much time on preparing for meetings like this, but in my experience, that's exactly what you do need to do to be successful. And so this is real good, real talk about how long it takes to prepare for important meetings like the ones you're talking about.

Casey Winters (17:33):
Absolutely. I mean, for better or worse, the way that a lot of key decisions are made inside companies are through these types of forums and meetings. And it's an extremely high leverage piece of time for a product manager or a product designer in terms of how much impact they can have. And if you are under preparing for those sorts of things, the chances of you being able to have the type of impact you want, to have the type of career growth you want just go down dramatically. And I'm sure, you and I have definitely made mistakes in our career in important meetings in the past, but I think one of the things that I really try to do is learn from each one of those and make sure those types of issues wouldn't happen again. And now I feel like I have a pulse on, I know if I haven't done the work going into a meeting, that's going to make it have a more negative result.

(18:26):
And now I'm pretty accurate. And look sometimes you just didn't have enough time and it is what it is. But now I know, okay, I know I'm not quite prepared for this and it can go poorly as a result. And I know also when I've done the right prep and I'm ready for anything, whether it's a board meeting, or a meeting with the executive team, or a meeting with an external partner, right? And I think that's what you're trying to build as any sort of product leader, or PM, or product designer, or researcher, is that intuition of like I'm ready for this, I know everything that's going to come at me, I'm prepared for any eventual outcome. And if you're not, then probably the answer is spend more time to get ready.

Lenny (19:09):
Speaking of spending more time, another topic that you shared with me that you're thinking a lot about as a CPO is keeping the Eventbrite product simple while adding more and more functionality to make it more usable by more people and more use cases. And so I'd love to hear how you're approaching that because I know that's something every single product faces eventually assuming they keep growing, and survive, and keep adding more power.

Casey Winters (19:34):
Yeah, Scott Belsky who's the chief product officer of Adobe. He has this concept of the product life cycle you're probably familiar with, but I'll explain it to your listeners, which is users flock to a simple product. The product takes users for granted and adds more features for power users and then users flock to the next simple product as a result. And I've done a lot of research and work on this problem. And I found that there are a few different design hacks, essentially that companies use to try to avoid this cycle. One is okay if you build out more complex functionality, un-bundle it over time, like Facebook Messenger, Uber Eats have done, right? At Pinterest, we did a heavy investment in progressive disclosure, which is let's hide a lot of the more complex functionality until we make sure our users learn the really critical functionality. And then we can open up more of the full suite of the product.

(20:34):
Then there's just proactive training. You can get on a video call with your customers or a phone call, much more common in enterprise, obviously, or you might have a custom UI that goes away over time. That's giving you the training wheels. You can also segment experiences based on different user types, so certain users might get a very simple user experience and then some users might get the more complex one, and there's different packages and interfaces that cleanly separate the two, maybe that more complex experience also bundles in training. What I found is that just none of these really worked that well for the Eventbrite scenario, because we have different types of event creators across every possible level of complexity and sophistication. We have people that are putting on their first event and they expect five people to show up. We have people putting on a hundred events per year that really know what they're doing.

(21:32):
And then users also shift from one of those categories to another over time. They can get more sophisticated as they build up their business, so segmentation doesn't really work that well. Progressive disclosure doesn't work that well either because in many of these cases, we never want certain types of users to find the more advanced stuff, it's just going to confuse them. We strive for this concept of what we call perceived simplicity, which is there are advanced features in the product and they are easily discoverable when you look for them, but they're effectively hidden if you're not looking for them. And of course the majority of users aren't going to ever look for them, so the advanced more complex areas of the product don't make the product harder to use for the majority who will never need that level of complexity. And there are areas where we do this well and areas where we're still working on getting better, but that's really our aspiration.

(22:26):
The company that I feel like has always done the best job of this is WhatsApp, where at its core, it's a chat app and it's really good at being a chat app. But I remember when I went to Brazil, all of a sudden I started receiving voice messages and it was really easy to figure out how to use them and how to do them myself. When I needed to learn how to do video calls or phone calls, it would take less than a second to figure out how to use the more advanced stuff, but it's effectively kind of hidden if you're not looking for it. That's what we aspire to at Eventbrite. And in some cases we're doing well. And in some cases, we definitely have some work to do.

Lenny (22:59):
Is there an example of a win in that direction in the Eventbrite product that you're proud of using this model or even something that's like, oh man, this is really broken?

Casey Winters (23:08):
Yeah, we've definitely had some wins here on the marketing side of our products, so one of the bigger investments we've made recently is our creators do a lot of their own marketing to try to get people to come to their events and transact on Eventbrite in the process. But our event creators, they're not professional marketers, they try to figure these tools out, so we built a product that allows them to automate their Facebook advertising to get better results, supercharged by our data. And the product's working really well, but we found is that there are certain segments that, I want to geek out on this a little bit, right.

(23:47):
They want to figure out all the different target segments and optimize their creative, and then there are many creators who just want it done for them. We've been able to build some interfaces where the default is super simple, we'll handle the targeting for you, we'll handle the creative and then, Hey, here's an on-ramp if you want to get a little bit more sophisticated and do more of this yourself, so that's an area where I wouldn't say we've perfected it, but we've now really understood those different types of users and a have easy pass for both of them to be successful, so I'm really happy with that.

Lenny (24:22):
Awesome. Another topic that you wrote about that kind of touches on the stuff we were just talking about is justify non-sexy product improvements, things like stability, performance, developer velocity, things that as a PM leader, you're just like, no, no, no, let's just... The default is let's do that later, we got to hit our fricking metrics, we've got to drive growth. And you had some really interesting insights on how you think about justifying these sorts of things. And so I'd love to hear that from you?

Casey Winters (24:49):
The idea is that some of the most impactful projects that product teams can work on at scale, not early stage startups per se, but at scale are the hardest to measure. And because of that, they just get chronically underfunded. It's that old adage, what gets measured gets managed, right? For things like user experience, or performance, or developer velocity, or just a product area that's deemed un-sexy, like growth used to be back in the day, I walk through some examples of a few tactics that work to get around this problem, building custom metrics to show the value, being able to run small tests that prove the worthwhile-ness of the investment, creating some team principles that make sure you don't ever kind of forget about these important elements that can hurt you in the long run. And also just how to use experiments to build buy-in at the broader level.

(25:41):
And one of the main takeaways besides some of those tactics in being successful here is that you have to get a team to buy-in to this. You can't really do a lot of this work alone, right? If you're a PM, you want to be approaching this from a well, my engineering manager and my design leader also bought in that we need to work on performance or we've all aligned that the user experience is not going in quite the direction we want, and we want to head some problems off that may not improve metrics today, but could certainly decline metrics tomorrow. And if you can get a small team, what two, three people aligned on the importance of something that's deemed un-sexy. It's a lot easier to start to build this game plan around metrics or running small tests or structuring OKRs to not only prioritize this work, but to show some really massive impact. Which could then get the rest of the company much more excited to make investments themselves.

Lenny (26:48):
What I'm hearing is step one is just get your kind of peer leaders aligned behind something that may not obviously be something your leaders want you to do, is that right?

Casey Winters (26:59):
Absolutely, yep.

Lenny (27:01):
This episode is brought to you by Whimsical. When I asked product managers and designers on Twitter, what software do they use most? Whimsical is always one of the most mentioned products, and the users are fanatical. Whimsical is built for collaborative thinking, combining visual, text, and data canvases into one fluid medium. Distributed teams use Whimsical for workshops, white boarding, wire frames, user flows, and even feature specs. And that includes thousands of built in icons and a rich library of templates. See why product teams at leading companies call Whimsical a game changer, visit whimsical.com/lenny to have my own templates added to your account when you sign up, that's whimsical.com/lenny.

(27:47):
Is there anything else that you think is really valuable, powerful, effective in just getting folks to getting your leaders to basically go along with some that maybe isn't going to move metrics or is that the core of it?

Casey Winters (27:57):
Well, yeah. I mean, definitely it's hard when you can't create a metric that they can understand. I think the other area to think about is when you're an early stage company, everything you're doing is trying to drive upside, like trying to drive growth in some way, it could be short term or long term, but you're trying to drive real growth for the business. But then when you've actually built a real business, a lot of times people are still in that same mode, which is everything is trying to add more growth on top of what we've already got. But when you're at scale, you can actually lose what you've built, so trying to help whether it's executives or just your manager, understand that this thing we've got, whether it's a high conversion rate or good engagement on this feature, it could go away if we don't do these other things.

(28:48):
And here's what it would look like if that goes away, that can be incredibly powerful. I think we were fortunate at Pinterest in this regard, in that we were a fast growing startup that stopped growing due to some changes in the market related to Facebook. And then actually once we had switched to growing primarily through SEO, there was an algorithm change that severely impacted our growth at one point in time, so that helped the company build more intuition of like we're not guaranteed the gains from all the things we've built in the past. We need to do things to protect them and protecting what we've got actually is increasingly important once you build scale, because now you've built something really valuable already. And yes, we want to make it more valuable of course, but it's hard to make it more valuable if you're eroding some of the gains you've already built, so that's another element that I think can be pretty impactful.

Lenny (29:41):
In your post on this topic you have an awesome chart of product market fit over time, illustrating the point you just made that it doesn't last and you have to keep iterating to keep your product market fit like you're by default falling behind if you're not continuing to push there, right?

Casey Winters (29:54):
Yeah. I think the concept is user expectations just continue to go up every day in terms of their expectations on user experience, on the value that they expect your product to provide, but also the competitive landscape in the market continues to get better. Yeah, if you're not continually pushing to make your product better, your user experience better, your latency better, then you're eventually not necessarily tomorrow, but maybe in a year, maybe in five years, you might find yourself fall out of product market fit entirely. And that's a really dangerous place to be, because then it's going to take a long time to figure that out and make adjustments. And then you probably have more technical debt to clean up, to be able to get back to where you need to be, where the market has reached in terms of expectations, so just doing work to make sure you never get in that situation is extremely valuable, in my opinion. It's something that I think a lot of teams forget about.

Lenny (30:54):
I think you're going to create nightmares for a lot of founders listening to this right now.

Casey Winters (30:59):
That's not the intention, but-

Lenny (31:02):
No, it's a kick in the butt. Another post that I definitely wanted to chat about. Maybe your SPST post, maybe I'm curious if there are others is around operations team, product ops and generally ops people.

Casey Winters (31:12):
Yep.

Lenny (31:13):
And this point that you made that ops is often a sign of inefficiency on a product team because in theory, a lot of the roles should be done by software, eventually. I'd love to unpack this and hear your take on this?

Casey Winters (31:26):
I think I originally got the idea for the post in that I had written another essay on MarTech. And how MarTech to be really successful, it's really got a target engineers more so than marketers. And that a lot of MarTech businesses just aren't very good businesses. And I think I got an invite to speak at a MarTech conference to a bunch of marketers about this post. And it's like, well, that sounds like a terrible idea. I'm basically telling a bunch of marketers that what they're investing in isn't that important, and that they're not the most important target customer. And I remember reading something about the conference that was like a conference for the growth of the marketing operations professional. And then I was like, oh no, that's not what I want in the industry at all. Like having marketing ops means you suck at marketing.

(32:18):
And obviously that's a bit of hyperbole. I'm not against the concept of a marketing ops role or a product ops role, we have a product ops team at Eventbrite, but as someone who ran a double digit million marketing budget at GrubHub without marketing ops, because we invested in automation and we invested in process, it scares me when the first tactic people go to is to add people to help scale. There's nothing wrong with people obviously, there's nothing wrong with operations people. The thing I have a problem with is normalizing ops as a distinct stable function where operations rules are amazing and how we utilize them at Eventbrite is their explicit job is to go find inefficiencies and build process or software to root out that inefficiency, so then they can go find other places to be more valuable. When you say, oh, their job is to do this manual process long term.

(33:16):
That's where I get super concerned because you're not rooting out efficiency in how you build your company. And that's where I feel like a lot of this can go if you're not careful, Intercom has a really good blog post on this from a while back around their business operations team. And they basically up front in that post say the goal of business operations is to not exist, and I definitely very much agree with that. I think in general functional ops roles, whether it's product ops or marketing ops or whatever, they're a hack to deal with some sort of functional issue on your team. And it's totally okay to have functional issues. Startups are going to have functional issues all over the place, but if the way they deal with that functional issue is by building larger and larger operations teams and roles. That's basically exacerbating an inefficiency issue, a functional issue, it's not fixing it. It's a form of empire building and in general empire building is something I don't have a lot of tolerance for.

(34:16):
You're making more of a function unable to operate without human intervention by saying the goal is to scale up marketing ops or product ops. Whereas what the goal should be is let's use our brains to run experiments, to make us more functional with less people. We're more efficient, we could add more value to the customer, and to the business. And if that means I don't actually need to have this product operations job in a year. That's awesome. And guess what, if you've shown you've done a really great job at rooting out inefficiencies. Every part of the company's going to want you to do some other job if that job is no longer valuable, because you've done such good job eliminating the need for it. There isn't this real concern that I'm going to lose my job by being too effective at it. It's like, no, you're going to show that you're just awesome at many types of jobs that product leaders or marketing leaders care about, so that's my perspective.

Lenny (35:09):
I love that. And this happened a lot at Airbnb, a lot of amazing office people ended up moving into other roles once the role was not necessary or they just wanted to do something else. And clearly people wanted them on their team because they were killing it.

Casey Winters (35:20):
Indeed.

Lenny (35:21):
One last question about the CPO role, and then I want to shift a bit to just product management and growth. What is the job of a CPO for folks that are just like, what the heck, what is this thing? What do you do all day?

Casey Winters (35:32):
Yeah.

Lenny (35:32):
And then what does it take to get there? Just like what should people work on most if they're trying to get to CPO someday?

Casey Winters (35:39):
First off, when you think about what's the job, the way I think about it is I'm responsible for leading and facilitating the development of products and features that deliver value for Eventbrite's customers that will translate into value for the business. And each of those words were chosen pretty carefully. Now in terms of the scope of the function, a CPO role can lead a few different sub-functions. In my case, I lead product management, product design, research, and growth marketing, but different roles have kind of some or not as many of those, it can be pretty custom depending on the size of the company and what the leader's skill sets are. To talk a little bit more depth about the role. I think it's my job to make sure Eventbrite chooses the best possible product strategy based on the information we have, that we can adjust that strategy as we learn and continue to build that feedback loop.

(36:35):
It's also my job to define and consistently improve the process through which we set our product strategy, how we prioritize projects, how we execute on them to make sure we're delivering that value to our customers, we're delivering those tangible business results. And to do that in a way where the rest of the company understands it and is able to participate in it as well, so this is things like identifying bottlenecks that prevent us from delivering value, or quality, or doing that at the detriment of speed, working with people across the company to remove those bottlenecks, making sure people outside of development are aware of what we're building, participating in the development and feedback of what we're building, as well as in helping deliver that for like a GTM perspective. And last but not least, and we've talked a little bit about this earlier, training the team on what it means to be an effective product manager, product designer, user research, et cetera, at Eventbrite.

(37:36):
And then of course hiring people who can augment our existing team on everything I just mentioned, so I'm accountable for what we build driving value for the business. And there's of course going to be many times where what we build doesn't end up driving value. It's hard to predict sometimes, but it's my job to improve that conversion rate and the magnitude of impact over time. It might not be that everything we build delivers value, but I want most of it to, and I want the impact of that value to be higher and higher over time. You also asked about what it takes to get to the CPO role. And I think my journey's been more irregular than most of the people you probably talk to. Product management when I started my career, it was all a waterfall. It was built around massive releases, it was a totally different job from what we do now. Marketing was a lot more agile in the lowercase sense of agile and it mapped to my mind better as someone who's really influenced by the book, The Goal.

(38:40):
I think the tangible pieces of advice to get to this level that may be helpful is I always focused on where I thought there was leverage. I wanted to learn everything I could and focus on the things that had a big impact regardless of the org structure or the career path that meant, I wanted to really have a deep understanding of the entire business so I knew just what was worth focusing on to help the business. I think one of the things that's different about being a chief product officer versus other product roles is how much of a company leadership role it is versus a functional leadership role. You're expected in this role to optimize for the entire company, even at the expense of what's good for your team, so you really have to learn how to optimize for company first. That's like a key thing to learn that I think new executives can struggle with. And what advantage I think I had is I've basically been working with executives since my first job at apartments.com, so I learned to speak their language and understood what they cared about pretty early in my career.

(39:47):
And this is a really important element, assume that questions from them are them trying to learn versus them assuming you don't know something and testing you about it. I find that a lot of people get intimidated by executive questions when the executive is just trying to understand things. And then that changes the interaction you can have. The other element that served me well was just refusing to specialize. I thought if I could learn all the skills that would allow me to combine them to work on the most important things versus only work on the thing I knew how to work on. And that definitely led to slower visible progress in terms of career growth or titles, but it was a much faster path to the true executive role because I could speak better with CEOs about more topics than most of my peers. Obviously this is all my individual experience there are many paths to get to this type of level, but those are some things that have worked for me.

Lenny (40:45):
That was such an incredible definition and so much good advice there. And this is a good segue to another area that you have a really interesting insight on around the spectrum of product people. When I think of you, I think of two by twos and this is I think just a spectrum, which is unusual for Casey framework.

Casey Winters (41:01):
Yeah.

Lenny (41:01):
I'd love to hear your take on how you think about the spectrum and around up-scaling PMs to move along that spectrum?

Casey Winters (41:06):
The idea is, and this is something I was inspired from talking with Omar who runs product at Cambly. He used to run core product at Pinterest. It's this idea of any product team is like a gang of misfits, they all come from different backgrounds. Most people didn't start as a product manager, their first job, they might have been in sales, or in marketing, or analytics, or engineering, right. Everyone's bringing these different skill sets to the table. But the main spectrum that I've observed in product teams of any decent size is that you have two extreme types of product managers per se, and on perhaps the left side of the spectrum you have the crazy innovator types, they have so many different ideas, they pay attention to every single change in the industry, they all know all about the latest Apple API or Snapchat's latest product feature.

(42:06):
Those people are going to have ideas all the time. Actually, probably most of those ideas are going to be bad, but one out of ten's going to be just a game changer and they're generally not super great at turning that idea into action. And then on the extreme right side of the spectrum will be your typical executional focused PM, and they can do a really good job of taking a strong strategy and turning it into action that creates value for the customer, but they generally don't know what's going on in the industry. They can't think of a totally new product idea themselves. They're going to need support from above to be able to push them in the right direction and then they got it from there. When you think about recruiting, what we all want as CPOs in terms of people we bring into our team is we want people in the middle. We want people who are strategic, they understand what's going on in the industry, they can generate some good ideas, but they can also turn it into something real that delivers value for the customer and the company.

(43:08):
And there just aren't a ton of those people in the world. Not as many as we would like to recruit, so as a product leader, if I'm airing on the side of which side of the spectrum I want people from, I generally will take people who are good at execution over people who are good at generating ideas, because of course there's always too many good ideas that a company need to focus and execute well on the best ones. Whereas if I were a VC, I would probably bias to the people on the left because I don't need every company to work. If I invest in 10 different entrepreneurs who have crazy ideas and one of them works and becomes the next Airbnb, turns out I've done incredibly well as a venture capitalist. The challenge you practically deal with as a product leader is you end up recruiting, and managing, and growing a lot of executional people who can get stuff done, but if they want to get to the director level or if they want to get to my level, they need to get more strategic.

(44:06):
And we don't have good ways to turn great executors into great strategists as in general, like a product function, so I've started investing in a lot of different things here. Obviously I've built some programs for Reforge around product strategy. A lot of my team goes to those to try to learn. I've also been doing a lot of mentorship with the team to try to teach them what it looks like to do that well. I've had people come in to speak with the team like you and many other great product folks to show my team what great looks like and how people like you developed your skills. And I'm trying lots of different things to try to move more of the team to the middle, where they can be that optimal strategist that still retains that ability to deliver great value on top of the strategy versus just have ideas that can't be executed on. And it's definitely a work in progress, it's a lot of different tactics to try to build that skill set inside the team and scale it. And definitely something I feel like I'm still working on.

Lenny (45:11):
What I'm hearing is a lot of kind of the biggest upside for PMs to develop is basically to become more strategic and all the things you've shared are just ways or a lot of ways to just become better at strategies. It's interesting that that's like what you found to be the most essential piece for PMs to often level up at.

Casey Winters (45:30):
Like you said, it depends on the level, right. Early on in your career as a PM, you're going to get the most value by showing that you can ship real things to customers and that the customers like them, like that's by far the most important thing. But if you want to start managing groups of PMs, if you want to start a running a business unit, or a pillar, or a theme. I as a chief product officer, I'm going to expect you to be able to write that strategy doc without me. And you know what I found, whether it's through the advising roles or through coming into Eventbrite is just a lot of people couldn't do that step.

(46:04):
And that means when you try to become a product leader at the company and the CEO expects that from you and you can't do it, you're going to set yourself up to really cap hard on how fast your career can grow. And you'll get stuck, whether it's at the senior product manager level or at the group PM level, because you can't show that you can drive decision making on your own and that you can push forward new ideas that are going to help the company, so that's definitely where I've seen the biggest bottleneck in terms of skill sets. Obviously there's lots of important skill sets you want to build as a PM, but that one to get to the top is the great filter.

Lenny (46:40):
That's awesome advice for folks listening that are trying to figure out what should I work on? It's kind of simple a lot of times just get better at strategy and it feels like it elevates you in so many other ways.

Casey Winters (46:49):
Yeah, and of course we could talk for hours about what it means to get better at strategy and some of the tactics there.

Lenny (46:54):
It could be a follow up.

Casey Winters (46:56):
Because I know some PMs who struggle with that.

Lenny (46:56):
Follow up.

Casey Winters (46:57):
Yeah.

Lenny (46:58):
Okay.

Casey Winters (46:59):
Podcast number two.

Lenny (46:59):
Podcast number two, let's book it. Okay, so I can't let you go without talking about growth. Everyone's always trying to figure out how do we grow our company?

Casey Winters (46:59):
Right.

Lenny (47:07):
What can we do to accelerate growth? I know you're modest, but I think you're one of the smartest people in the world on this stuff. And so I just want to touch on a couple things in the time that we have here. One is with paid growth becoming increasingly more expensive and difficult, especially with Apple's recent changes.

Casey Winters (47:24):
Yep.

Lenny (47:24):
SEO forever becoming more crowded, sales being always expensive. It's just tough out there for a lot of startups to grow. Are you seeing any interesting or new growth channels or tactics that folks can explore or consider that maybe work for companies that you're looking at?

Casey Winters (47:43):
It's not that there are new channels per se, unless you include tokens from like Web3, which I do not. It's more that there are ways to get leverage on your channels through better flows or lifetime value that companies are figuring out. For example, at Eventbrite, we unified what we're separate direct response and lead generation flows in our performance marketing to acquire creators. And now it just takes less effort, we're getting better CPAs and sales now has the opportunity to pick up any product qualified lead from a direct response customer who may need a little bit more help, and they have the data to now determine if there's high enough value to justify it.

(48:27):
This concept is being dubbed, product led sales. And it's this idea that you can unify self-service loops in a B2B business, which are typically driven by product and your sales loops into one more complex giant loop that operates more efficiently and breaks down the silos. And I think you're going to see an explosion in B2B companies that learn how to unlock that and get sales, and product, and marketing to be working as one larger cross-functional team and building an engine that optimizes all of their skill sets, so that's something I'm pretty excited about, but we're definitely in the early days there.

Lenny (49:02):
That's awesome. I was going to ask you if there's any trends you're seeing around growth and clearly that's one. Are there any other trends, just things happening in the growth world?

Casey Winters (49:12):
Yeah, sure. I think there was this conventional wisdom to just focus on building until you found product market fit and then you can worry about growth. And of course there's some truth in that statement, but now as I'm talking with more and more founders and I'm sure you're seeing this yourself, is we're seeing founders who are thinking about building growth loops into their product before they find product market fit. And it's not so that they can prematurely scale before they have product market fit. It's so that when they find product market fit, they have that built in distribution advantage to grow once they're ready. And founders are starting to intuit what I've written about a bit as well as you, which is that scalable acquisition or what we call an acquisition loop is a requirement for product market fit.

(49:59):
Like if you got a product that retains well and you can't find more users for it, I don't think that's product market fit, so it's really exciting to see that evolution and to see founders think about like it's not about getting a bunch of users before you have a product that works. It's about thinking strategically about how this product's going to grow itself when it's ready to do so. I'm really excited to see the next generation of founders build that muscle early on and also leverage it when they're ready instead of just like, oh, I'm going to throw a bunch of paid ads at it and it's going to work, so that's something I'm really excited about.

Lenny (50:31):
On that topic, when should companies focus on growth? And as a second question, when do you think they should hire a head of growth or someone full-time focused on growth?

Casey Winters (50:40):
Like I mentioned, well, you don't want to focus on growth before product worked fit. You want to be thinking about how your product can grow scalable pretty early on, so early growth definitely needs to be done by the founders. I tend to separate growth into two phases. I call the first phase kindle strategies, these are those non-scalable hacks to get your early users. And I think those are generally done by founders, maybe some early team members. Fire strategies are the ones that drive scale, that's what you were mentioning, content loops, sales loops, viral loops, paid acquisition. And to me, the goal of your kindle strategies, these like non scalable hacks they only exist to unlock the fire strategies, to unlock the things that could take you to millions of users.

(51:24):
And it's once you unlock a fire strategy, that's when I think you think about hiring someone full time on growth to fully harness that new growth loop you've built. That could be a salesperson, if it's sales. It could be growth PM, if it's viral or you just see content. Or it could be a performance marketer if it's ads, but it's once it's like, okay, we've sequenced to a growth strategy that actually scales. Let's go find someone who's awesome at that who can make it 10X better. That's how I think about it.

Lenny (51:51):
Maybe a last question, is there is kind of an underappreciated or under invested in growth strategy, growth tactic, things that you're just like, oh wow, this seems to be working better than people may think.

Casey Winters (52:03):
Yeah. Well, I still think data network effects are underrated. I think a lot of people confuse the idea of data network effects with data as a product you can charge people for, especially like businesses. And I get it a lot of businesses like you can't charge them for data because they don't know how to use data super well, especially SMBs. But what data network effects are, is leveraging product usage data to make the product value stronger and stronger over time. That could be personalized results in the case of Pinterest or in the case of Eventbrite, better targeting data for advertising to find people who are more likely to be interested in your event. And I think especially with Facebook and Apple's platform changes your product being able to generate its own data, versus just relying on the big platforms to do all the work for you. That's a real edge that companies are starting to wake up to. And it's obviously something that's worked well for me in the past at Pinterest and certainly now at Eventbrite.

Lenny (53:02):
There's a couple questions that I had at the top that I skipped that I thought I'd come back to. I know that you're a big video game guy and I love that at the bottom of your post, you always share the music that you're listening to, so I was just going to ask what's the game you're playing these days. Anything you recommend and then what are you listening to?

Casey Winters (53:18):
Yeah, I'm currently playing Cyberpunk 2077 on the PS5, which is fun. But I recently finished Horizon Forbidden West and that was excellent, really great science fiction game. On the music side, one of my favorite bands is this band called Broadcast and they never really played live a whole lot and their singer died a few years ago, but they recently came out with a recording of a bunch of their live sessions that they recorded on the BBC. And it's like getting this time capsule from the past of some of their early live sessions. That's been really great, so I've been enjoining that record quite a lot lately.

Lenny (54:02):
Awesome. Casey's picks get them here, get them here now. Casey, I feel like I was successful in extracting many nuggets in our hour together, I really appreciate your time. Where can folks find you online and how can people that are listening be helpful to you?

Casey Winters (54:17):
Blog@caseyaccidental.com, I'm semi-active on Twitter @onecaseman, and always I focus on paying it forward, like help the next generation of companies, of PMs, of marketers, get better at their craft and build better businesses. And if you're searching for a cool event, check out the Eventbrite App of course, we always would appreciate that.

Lenny (54:43):
Love it. Amazing Casey, what a great way to end it. Thank you again for being here.

Casey Winters (54:48):
Thanks so much.

Lenny (54:50):
That was awesome, thank you for listening. If you enjoyed the chat, don't forget to subscribe to the podcast and even better leave a review, which helps a lot. You can also learn more at lennyspodcast.com. I'll see you in the next episode.

Casey Winters (00:00:00):
Every new person on the product team is acting like they work at Google and have these infinite resources and infinite time to make sure everything is perfect. It became such this focus on the right way of doing product management that no one's taken any risk. I felt like, oh, am I responsible for this? I've created a bunch of frameworks on Reforge. I'm onboarding these new PMs. Is this my fault? At Reforge, we're building frameworks that are tools in a toolkit. You pull them out when relevant. They're not a coloring book to stay inside the lines of.

Lenny (00:00:41):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard-won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today, my guest is Casey Winters. Casey was one of the first ever guests on the podcast, and the first to make a return appearance. He's a legend in the growth and product community, having worked with or advised companies like Pinterest, Reddit, Canva, Airbnb, Tinder, Thumbtack, Grubhub, and many more. He recently led product at Eventbrite for just about three years, and recently returned to full-time advising, and he's exploring new opportunities.

(00:01:17):
In our chat, we cover something he calls the zero interest rate phenomenon product manager and how to avoid that, what he's found works best when interviewing product managers, what impact he expects from GPT-4 on the role of product management, when to trust your instincts versus your team's insights and instincts, what are all the different kinds of network effects, and how do you effectively leverage them? Plus a great story about what Grubhub missed that let DoorDash and Uber eat their lunch. I always learn so much from chatting with Casey, and I am 100% sure you will learn a lot from this episode. With that, I bring you Casey Winters, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:56):
This episode is brought to you by Amplitude. If you're setting up your analytics stack but not using Amplitude, what are you doing? Anyone can sell you analytics, while Amplitude unlocks the power of your product and guides you every step of the way. Get the right data, ask the right questions, get the right answers, and make growth happen. To get started with Amplitude for free, visit amplitude.com. Amplitude, power to your products. 

(00:02:23):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but if there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack, this leads to wasted time building internal tools or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. 

(00:02:52):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage. Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic clickthrough metrics and instead use your North Star metrics, like activation, retention, subscriptions, and payments. Eppo supports tests on the front end, the back end, email marketing, and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, getE-P-P-O.com, and 10X your experiment velocity. 

(00:03:37):
Casey, welcome back to the podcast.

Casey Winters (00:03:39):
Thanks, Lenny. Great to be here.

Lenny (00:03:41):
You are the first ever return guest to my podcast. How does that feel?

Casey Winters (00:03:46):
I feel honored, perhaps a bit unworthy, but I'll go with it.

Lenny (00:03:52):
Well, you're both worthy and I'm honored as well. Thanks for joining me again. I have a lot of stuff that I want to chat about, but first of all, I'm just curious, what are you up to these days? I know you left Eventbrite as CPO, I know you're doing a few advisorships with startups, but how are you spending your days, and what do you think is next for Casey Winters?

Casey Winters (00:04:10):
I'm still spending some time with Whatnot and Eventbrite as  advisors. I stepped back from the CPO of Eventbrite in October, but still working on some long-term marketplace strategy stuff, some growth strategy stuff. I'm on the board of a company called Beek, which is like Netflix for audio in Latin America, and I'm doing some angel investing in marketplaces in what I call tech debt as a service, which is what are startups that are building out things that were hard for my teams in the past to build or maintain inside previous companies? The other thing I'm working on is revamping the product strategy program for Reforge. I got some things keeping me busy, but definitely not as busy as I was last year.

Lenny (00:04:53):
This is like a rare, free agent Case Winters time. Should people reach out if they're interested in maybe working with you? What's your advice for people listening?

Casey Winters (00:05:00):
Yeah. I always love seeing how I can help companies. Everyone should err on the side of reaching out and seeing if I have time to help, if there's something they think I can help with. I love talking to startups, so yeah, absolutely. I can't promise anything, but yeah, I just love talking to people about this stuff.

Lenny (00:05:19):
Awesome. We'll point people to how to get in touch with you at the end of the episode, and it'll be in the show notes too. Talking about the CPO role, you're at Eventbrite. You're a CPO. It reminds me of a post you wrote about how hard the CPO role is. There's some quotes that I recall in your post about how, one, if you ever ask a CPO, chief product officer how they're doing, no one's ever going to say, "I'm crushing it right now."

Casey Winters (00:05:41):
Yeah. 

Lenny (00:05:41):
Then there's this other quote about how you basically, as a CPO, just try to put some points on the board before you inevitably get fired. Why is that? Why do you find that, and do you still believe that to be true after leaving that role? 

Casey Winters (00:05:53):
Yeah, I would say I still believe those things I said. It was funny. A product leader who will remain nameless emailed me when I hit year three at Eventbrite, and they said, "Congrats. You didn't get fired after two years. What's your secret?" I think it's very hard to keep product-market fit as a CPO within a company for a long time. The needs of the business shift over time, and of course, we all have different strengths and weaknesses in our game. No one's perfect at everything. In general, as an executive, it's just impossible to do everything perfectly, and any little misstep, mistake, or something you just missed can blow up in a major way. 

(00:06:33):
Frequently, CEOs have visions that can change and get misaligned with the product leader. Also, with leadership roles, you don't get put on a PIP. If a CEO loses confidence, it's over immediately. Nothing like that happened at Eventbrite. I started to see that the areas of leverage for a product leader were just less in my wheelhouse over time. I just talked to my boss about it, and we worked out something where I continue to advise on the things that I'm uniquely good at, and find other people who are better at some of these other things that were maybe more important at the time.

(00:07:09):
Yeah, I'd say it's a really hard role, or a really challenging role. It can be a lot of fun. I learned a lot from doing it, but yeah, I still believe, and I think I've still yet to hear someone say they've really crushed it. 

Lenny (00:07:26):
Is there anything that you learned from that experience to have survived in that role for three years? I imagine you have a lot of skills and you were very valuable to the company, but I don't know, for someone in that's role maybe right now, just like, "Here's something that I did that maybe you should do." 

Casey Winters (00:07:40):
The first one I can think of is a big change from being a product leader to a CPO or something equivalent is you're actually a company exec first and a product exec second. I think some mistakes I made early that I corrected successfully is you want to show that you are caring and paying attention to the overall business first before just taking care of your own product designers, product managers, researchers, whoever. That's advice I found myself doling out to other product leaders a lot more now that I've gone through it. You have to not only truly care, but create the perception that you care about sales, about marketing, about legal, et cetera. Because first and foremost, you're expected to lead the business at that level, so I think that's something that I think is really important.

(00:08:35):
I think something else is really trying to diagnose, without as much bias as possible, where are the strengths and weaknesses of your team? Where are the strengths and weaknesses of your product? Lay that out with your peers and say, "Here's where we are. Here's where I think we need to go. Here's the timeline on which I'm going to work to get us there." Because I think product's such a confusing discipline for people who aren't in it, like a sales leader, many CEOs, a marketing leader, that they don't necessarily know what great looks like. 

(00:09:14):
The things they know about great leadership, they don't know if you know those things, so you have to make it really clear, "Yeah, I know our OKRs are not as quantitative as they should be yet. That's because this team isn't ready for X, Y, and Z. This is where we're going to get them to, but it's going to take some time." One of the things we did at Eventbrite that I thought was really helpful is, when you go public, you tend to rotate over your executive team and get public company execs versus startup execs. A few of us were new, and it's just like, "Hey, let's do a deep dive on product. Let's do a deep dive on customer support. Where's it at right now? What do you feel like your job is? What do you feel like are the issues you're facing? Where do you want to take it over the next three to five years? Then, let's talk about it."

(00:09:57):
Just forcing you to write it all down is really helpful, but then it forces you to explain it. It helps the rest of the executive team get better company execs because now they really understand product a lot more deeply, or understand finance a lot more deeply, whatever the function is.  

Lenny (00:10:15):
Speaking of gaps and opportunities for people in the company to level up, you've been highlighting this trend that I thought was really interesting, something you call the zero interest rate phenomenon product manager. Can you talk about what that is and what you've been noticing?

Casey Winters (00:10:33):
Yeah, sure thing. This is something I started noticing while managing PMs and product designers at Eventbrite, and it's now coming up with Whatnot as I help them hire new PMs, is the environment in which a lot of product managers have come up is very distorted from when you and I started doing this kind of work. I think we used to always describe PMs as this gang of misfits. We all started in all different functions. We all had different strengths and weaknesses, and the PM team gained as a whole from that diversity of skills and previous experiences.

(00:11:12):
What I noticed is, when we started doing product reviews at Eventbrite, if there was any sort of uncertainty in a problem or a solution, the product manager, instead of shipping to learn, would talk about all this research they have to do to really learn the problems, really learn the solution. 

(00:11:30):
My feedback would be like, no, user research is a scarce resource. We have to reserve it for the areas that have extreme uncertainty and high leverage for getting to certain, so if you're redesigning the login page for Eventbrite, you don't need to use that resource to learn what to do. Just go see what FANG and the top unicorns did. They probably did a good job, and even if they didn't, all of our customers also use those products, so they're going to be familiar with us copying any approach that they've taken.

(00:12:05):
I think we sort of forgot in the industry that many times, the fastest way to learn is to ship, so that if you actually get them to skip research and just go look at competitors, another thing I was noticing is I'd get a list of options other companies have done, but there would be no analysis of why those companies chose different options and what's most applicable for us. 

(00:12:31):
It got me thinking, okay, every new person on the product team is acting like they work at Google and have these infinite resources and infinite time to make sure everything is perfect. It became such this focus on the right way of doing product management that no one's taken any risk. I felt like, oh, am I responsible for this? I've created a bunch of frameworks on Reforge. I'm onboarding these new PMs. Is this my fault? At Reforge, we're building frameworks that are tools in a toolkit. You pull them out when relevant. They're not a coloring book to stay inside the lines of.

(00:13:10):
At one point, I got so fed up, I wrote an internal blog post, and I called it On Best Practices and Breakfast Rituals. I talked about how there were these articles about the morning habits of the most successful people, and if you try to do all those things, it'd take you like six hours every morning. There was this article, I think it was on Business Insider or something, about this futurist at Google. He talked about all the pills and food he eats for breakfast every morning to try to live longer. The reporter estimated that it cost him one million a year to have these habits, so I was like, "Hey, I want to make it clear. At Eventbrite, we don't have that much money. We don't have that much time. There's no framework that allows you to not use your brain at this company and just follow some sort of process for success in this profession."

(00:14:02):
I adopted this thing into a public blog post that's on my blog now, but now that I've had some time outside of Eventbrite, I feel like I at least partially missed the mark on what's really going on. I see this with Whatnot, because one of the things I'm helping them with is interviewing, I see PMs again, which I haven't done in a while. It's fascinating interviewing a PM or managers early in their career because Whatnot is a startup, and you know better than most of us as a former founder of one, startups typically require us to wear lots of hats. You have to write SQL. You have to talk directly to customers. You have to prep marketing and sales. Most importantly, you have to make a lot of decisions under uncertainty, which you wouldn't necessarily expect a PM to do at, say, a Google, but it all boils down to using your brain in different ways.

(00:14:54):
Lisa, who's on our legal team, she called Eventbrite a public startup because the pandemic basically erased her business and we had to build it back from scratch. Now that I'm doing these interviews, and whether they come from a small startup, a unicorn, or a public company, they all sort of look the same because there's been so much funding to all these companies. Every company's been acting like they're Google with Google margins, meaning a lot of engineering support, a lot of design support, a lot of research support, lots of analysts around them.

(00:15:22):
They actually seem pretty ill-prepared for a real startup, or even a public company with some uncertainty around it like Eventbrite, so you start getting these weird responses in the interview process. You ask them to solve a problem and they'd say things like, "I can't even begin to come up with solutions until I see all the data and talk to customers." I'm like, "Yeah, I get that's something you would normally do if you took the job, but you don't have the data. You can't talk to customers. Make a decision now. What would you do? I want to see how creative you are. I want to see how much you're intuiting about the real problem and solution," and they can't really answer. 

(00:15:56):
Then my follow-up, which I don't ask, but what I really want to ask is like, "When's the last time you used your brain versus followed a process someone else designed at your company?" Because I want the former, not the latter.

Lenny (00:16:09):
Wow. Amazing. There's a lot of things I want to dig into here. I was going to ask why you call it zero interest rate phenomenon, but I think what I'm hearing is it's when interest rates are zero, everyone's got a lot of money, things are going great. Everyone looks like they're killing it, successful. Everyone thinks they've got it all figured out, and then when that goes away, it's like, "Oh, shit. Maybe not so." 

Casey Winters (00:16:27):
Then also, I think zero interest rates allowed every startup to operate like it was a public company with billions of dollars. That's going to go away over the next five years, and it sort of takes us back to what product management used to be like, which was you didn't have all these resources around. You didn't have all this time to figure it out because if you don't figure it out now and make it work, you may run out of funding, right?

Lenny (00:16:51):
Yeah. Like a very concrete thing that's changed as a lot of research teams have been laid off because they grew really large and companies found, "Maybe we need don't need the ..." Like, "Of all the things we can cut, it's probably an area we can cut." 

Casey Winters (00:17:02):
Yeah, for sure. 

Lenny (00:17:04):
There's probably PMs listening to this wondering, "Shoot, am I one of these? Am I just following a bunch of frameworks?" What's your advice for someone that may fear that, "Oh, shoot. This is maybe who I am and I don't want to necessarily be this"? What could they maybe do?

Casey Winters (00:17:17):
I always advise going to companies where you can learn quickly and try things. I think it's certainly okay to learn a bunch of frameworks. There's a reason I've invested a ton of time in Reforge because I think it actually really does help people to see how other people build things in a way that they can scale it to their other companies, but you have to understand that the job is not to follow the process. The job is not to learn every framework possible. The job is to figure out how to add value to customers that translates into value to the business. Just reorient your North Star, if you've gotten away from that.

(00:17:53):
When I joined Eventbrite, there was this team that didn't ship anything in a quarter. I went to the designer who I knew, and I know that he likes to get stuff out there and likes to get feedback. I was like, "Dude, you didn't ship anything. How could you have gone the entire quarter, not shipped any of your designs and felt that that was okay? If you didn't feel it was okay, why did you censor yourself? Come to me. Tell me why this team is not letting you ship. There's just no way you can get better as a designer. There's no way you can have the impact on the company. There's no way you can have an impact on our users." Those are some things that come to mind to that question.

Lenny (00:18:36):
If you're a PM on a team that maybe isn't shipping, maybe is overusing research, do you have any advice of just like when it makes sense to invest in research? Say you have the resources, is there a rule of thumb you have of like, "Okay. Let's actually spend the time on this verse not"? 

Casey Winters (00:18:51):
I think about it a little bit, depending on the type of job you have and the types of customers you have. The more scale you have tends to be you have less sophisticated customers because you're generally like a consumer thing where the customers are rational. They're not experts. That's generally where you just try things. You measure the impact they have, and you only really bring in USEARCH, research when the impact seems confusing, but you can run experiments. You can get data really easily, so bias towards getting stuff out there and seeing what users respond to.

Lenny (00:19:30):
In consumer product.

Casey Winters (00:19:31):
Right. 

Lenny (00:19:31):
Interesting. 

Casey Winters (00:19:31):
If you're super enterprise, it's the opposite. Each customer, first off, is sophisticated and tend to be rational. They're paying you like six figures or more, and you could talk to the customers and sales, who knows the customers really well directly, and they tell you want they want. They tell you what they're willing to pay for. You build it. They pay you. Bing, bang, boom. It's not, obviously, as simple as that, but you're basically doing the research directly with the customer and with the sales team, and translating that into things that are strategic to the business.

(00:20:02):
I would say those are the two extremes probably most people are familiar with, but we now have a lot of companies in the middle, where they have more customers. Those customers are more sophisticated. They're consumers. They're maybe employees at companies, or they're small businesses. That's where you have to be more nuanced. This, of course, is where Eventbrite was on, "Hey, when do I really lean in on research? When do I lean in on data? When do I pay attention to internal feedback?

(00:20:29):
" For Eventbrite, we really tried to focus research on the B2B side of Eventbrite, where the problems seemed big, but not well-defined enough. Or that problem's well-defined, but we just really don't feel like we have the right solution yet. If research is going to be a scarce resource inside the company, which I think it will in most places, you have to figure out where it's a high-leverage area, which means either really big problem, we don't understand it well enough, or we know the problem's big. We understand it well, but we're just not sure if our solution's going to, in any way, hit the mark. 

Lenny (00:21:06):
Makes me think about some of the best researchers I've worked with, and they often tell me like, "We don't need to do research on this. We have enough information. We have other things we should be doing."

Casey Winters (00:21:13):
I love it when they say that. Yes.

Lenny (00:21:15):
Yeah. This would have been a really good segue to another topic I want to talk about, which is around gut instincts versus team expertise, which we're going to get to, but I have a couple more questions along these lines. 

Casey Winters (00:21:24):
Sure. 

Lenny (00:21:25):
You talked about interviewing PMs at Whatnot. Can you actually describe Whatnot? Just because you mentioned it a couple times, just so people know what we're talking about here.

Casey Winters (00:21:33):
Oh, sure. Whatnot's a livestreaming marketplace, mostly focused on the collectibles market. Sellers, whether it's like baseball cards, or women's handbags, or sneakers, they'll go live on video and show you the products they have that they're selling. People that are watching the stream can engage with the sellers and bid on different items, so kind of like Twitch meets eBay would be a good way to describe it. 

Lenny (00:21:54):
Awesome, awesome. I'll just mention, I'm a tiny angel investor in that company. 

Casey Winters (00:21:56):
Oh, that's why you brought it up. Okay, I get it.

Lenny (00:22:00):
Yeah, I just wanted to make sure people understood what this word was because it's like a fun word, Whatnot. What I wanted to actually get to is you said you were interviewing a lot of project managers for them.

Casey Winters (00:22:09):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:22:09):
What is your approach to interviewing PMs? What do you find is a really good signal for someone that's going to be successful?

Casey Winters (00:22:14):
I feel like the whole thing's gotten so performative. It's like interviewing is handing out Oscars based on who's prepared the best tell me about a time response, versus actually assessing who can do the job we're hiring for. It's like most PMs are better PM interviewers than PMs now. There's this quote from a movie called The Way of the Gun. I don't know if you've ever seen it.

Lenny (00:22:35):
No.

Casey Winters (00:22:36):
Benicio del Toro says in it, it's like, "These days, they want to be criminals more than they want to commit crime." I think about that quote a lot when it comes to interviewing. I would say I'm a bit contrarian here in my approach. I don't ask about your work history. I don't care about your perfectly practiced answers. I'm going to give you real scenarios that I expect from the role. I want to hear how you'd approach them. If you can't come up with a few reasonable ideas, figure out how to test them quickly without analyst support or research, I'm just not interested.

(00:23:10):
I'm not saying this is a perfect approach. Interviewing is a very lossy format, but the more I can see them do the job we're hiring for with questions, whether it's a presentation, a prompt, that gets me the most comfortable that they know the job they're signing up for, that they've shown in a practice scenario they can do it, and they actually enjoyed it in some way.

Lenny (00:23:29):
Are there red flags you look for in these interviews? One is maybe you said of like, "I can't even begin to answer this without research and data." Is there anything else?

Casey Winters (00:23:36):
Some things I pay attention to is if they're talking about solutions that are going to take a long time to get signal from, whether it's months and months of engineering time before you actually see the impact on users or the business, I think that's always great. If they're not factoring in the amount of time it will take, in general, is not a good sign, and not thinking a bit more holistically about the types of metrics they expect to improve versus track to make sure they haven't gone down. Those are some things that I pay a lot of attention to.

Lenny (00:24:11):
How much do you think they're intimidated by being interviewed by Casey Winters? How much do you think that factors in?

Casey Winters (00:24:16):
I think you overestimate my importance or awareness in the community. I think most people have no idea who I am when they start talking to me.

Lenny (00:24:25):
Mm-hmm. [inaudible 00:24:25] Another thought is there's this meme that GBT-4, or 5, or 6, or 10 is going to replace product managers, and anytime some new feature comes out, people will put out these videos of, "Oh, look. They're doing all the PM's jobs." What's your take on the future of PM in AI, if any?

Casey Winters (00:24:41):
Well, I think if you thought the PM job was just filling in the latest Reforge or Shreyas framework, and then getting that automatic FANG promotion every year and a half, then yeah, you're going to get replaced by AI. I think the real PM job is the least likely to get replaced over time because you need real subject matter expertise. You need to be trading off a lot of different types of things, and making good decisions for the company and for your customers. 

(00:25:10):
In terms of using AI now as a PM, I'd actually be cautious in the current iteration of the cycle for PMs. It's a tool that's trained on sounding smart rather than always necessarily being smart. I was at Eventbrite the other day, and someone was telling me how they were loving the new Notion AI integration. She asked me if I used it. I said, "No." She's like, "Ah, you totally need to. Hey, go ask it your bio. It's really cool." I said, "All right. Let's just do it on your screen," so she did and my bio said I started my career at Google, and worked on Google Trends, and a bunch of other products, none of which happened. It was just complete nonsense.

(00:25:52):
It did have some stuff that did happen. It knew I worked at Eventbrite, and it knew I worked at Pinterest and stuff, but half of it was just completely made up. It sounded plausible, but it wasn't actually true. I think where I'm more inclined for PMs to try to get leverage out of something like GPT-4 is a lot of the tedious work that's maybe not their specialty to begin with. If you're not great at Excel or Google Sheets and you need to model something, you can ask it to format something. That'll probably be perfect, or how to get some Zapier integration to work. It probably knows how to do that really well.

(00:26:28):
I think, at this point, it's a pretty good no-code to low-code tool. It's obviously going to become a lot more than that, but for a lot of these other use cases that people are touting, there's a decent chance, confidently tells you the wrong thing, and that would scare me as a PM. 

Lenny (00:26:45):
I've had the exact same experience. I had to describe what I've done, and it was like 70% mistaken. 

Casey Winters (00:26:52):
Yeah. 

Lenny (00:26:53):
Is there anything you've found value in yet with GPT of any kind in your work, or is it still kind of just poking around and novelty for you?

Casey Winters (00:27:00):
Yeah. I've had a couple of those things where it's like, "Hey, how do I actually get this weird thing done?" It's been like clear bullet points, take these steps, and I'm like, "Oh, great. This was actually really hard to find on Google." Things like that, I actually quite like it for, so that's where my head goes to more confidently use it. Of course, I'll try it and if it's wrong-

Lenny (00:27:24):
Just throw it away. 

Casey Winters (00:27:25):
... I'll learn where it's wrong, so it's low-risk, but it's been right on some of those things and it's like, "Oh, cool. I couldn't figure out how to do that." There was something on Google Docs that I needed to figure out how to do that was kind of fancy. I asked ChatGPT. It told me how to do it, and I was like, "Oh, great." 

Lenny (00:27:39):
I had a similar experience where I just needed a formula in Google Sheets, and just told it like, "I need this thing," and it just gives me the actual formula. 

Casey Winters (00:27:45):
Yeah, that's so magical when it happens. 

Lenny (00:27:47):
Yeah. I don't know. I'm not that good with Sheets formulas. Shifting course a little bit, you also wrote this really interesting post on founder intuition versus team expertise. There's a lot to it, and I think it's a really interesting topic because it's this classic discussion that startups have. How much should a founder trust their gut, and how much should it be top-down, "Here's what we should be doing" versus the team, bottom-up, figure out what to build? I'd love to spend a little time here. Maybe just to start broadly, what is this? You came up with a framework of how to think about when founder intuition should overrule, say, team expertise, and how that change over time, so maybe just talk about that. 

Casey Winters (00:28:26):
Yeah. If founders are lucky/good enough to find product-market fit, they've usually built up all this intuition about their customers, about their product, and their business that are really hard to explain to others and may even be subconscious. When they start to hire people, these people will come in with a lot of excitement, ideas, maybe even really relevant experience, especially senior leaders. I've seen some founders are like, "Cool. I need to let these experts start to own these areas and get out of the geek house." I think that's actually the opposite of what you want, because none of these people know the business as well as you get it. You actually need to direct them until they show you they've really got it and are making better decisions than you would. 

(00:29:17):
This is not a founder example, but I remember when I hired Erika Warren to build out our loyalty program at Grubhub, and she now leads growth at Change.org. After a month or so, she was like, "Dude, you're in all my meetings. I got this." That let me know she was in a different part of the situational leadership framework than I had put her in, so I backed away, and she crushed it from there.

(00:29:40):
Founders will put a lot of new leaders in that delegate bucket too quickly. It's like, "Ah, they got it. They know more than me," when founders actually know the right answer and should just tell them. This can, of course, change like in the case of Erika. If you hire the right people, they do get smarter than you. You can and you should start delegating. Many founders don't notice the signals where their founder intuition has been usurped by team expertise, or maybe it's just ebbed in effectiveness over time. That, of course, makes sense. Founders have all these different things they're dealing with, and your employees can really dive deep in certain areas. I encourage employees to proactively signal both directions, like, "Hey, I need direction from you." Or, "Hey, I got it from here. Trust me on this one."

Lenny (00:30:27):
Interesting. You're saying, as a founder, the heuristic should be if you feel confident about a decision, generally, you should be clear, like, "Hey, I think I know what we need to be doing here," and don't just make people feel better, necessarily, by just saying, "Okay. You tell us what you want to do." Then on the flip side, as an employee at the company, if you feel really confident about something, make it clear to the founder like, "I really think this is the right move." Is there anything more you want to add there?

Casey Winters (00:30:55):
Yeah. Well, there's obviously the feedback loop of that, of what happens when you do either of those things. Depending on the founder's response to that or the employee's response to that, there's different approaches you can take.

Lenny (00:31:13):
Part of this, you have this cool chart of just over time, the founder expertise becomes less and less relevant. I guess, is that because they just don't spend as much time with the customers because they have other stuff going on or they hire people that are smarter, and then over time, the team expertise goes up?

Casey Winters (00:31:26):
If you're lucky enough to scale a company, there's just more and more things going on that all will reach the founder in some way, but it means more breadth and less depth on any particular issue, and the reverse is true for people you hire. They're able to get really deep into things that maybe you were really deep into two years ago but you just can't stay deep in anymore. I built this chart on, or I guess I should say table on the different phases of a startup. When you're finding product-market fit, everything goes through the founders. You cannot outsource that.

(00:32:08):
Then when you start scaling the company because you found product-market fit, it's the first time that founders run into this classic problem of what got you here won't get you there. What got you to product-market fit was iterating on product and doing things that don't scale. Guess what? You found a product that works. Don't do that anymore. Make it scale. Don't come up with new products. You found the one that works. The reason I came up with this framework originally is when I was at Grubhub, we were scaling pretty nicely and fairly organically. 

(00:32:39):
I think Mike and Matt, the founders, had intuited these phases of building a company pretty well, but we acquired a competitor and I saw how that company we acquired operated. Even though they were largely in the same phase as us, they still operated like they were founding the company. Everything was going through the founder. Intuitively, I was like, "Oh, this is why we're acquiring you, and not the other way around." 

(00:33:09):
I think it's really hard for founders to get those signals organically, and I think it's up to us as employees to help. The founders can listen to the signals or not listen to those signals, but that's part of why we're here, but we should also give those signals when we're confident we really get it. Not come in day one being, "I know what your sales strategy should be. You're doing it all wrong." Because chances are, the founders weren't doing it all wrong. They knew something you don't know about yet.

Lenny (00:33:34):
What is it that you think made it such that you won and they didn't? Is it because they didn't invest, they didn't shift to scaling and delegating to their employees as much as the founder just telling everyone to do it?

Casey Winters (00:33:43):
Correct, right. Everything was not moving as quickly because everything had to go through the same person to get done. It just allowed them to not launch as many markets, not sign up as many restaurants, to not figure out as many growth channels, yeah, as we had done.

Lenny (00:33:59):
Got it. They just bottlenecked themselves and they weren't able to move as fast because the founder thought they needed to make these decisions, and they were still the ones that knew everything.

Casey Winters (00:34:08):
Yep.

Lenny (00:34:09):
That makes me think about most companies. Maybe not most, but many founders just believe they have the answers. They are confident they know what to do, and it's rare they get to a place of like, "Nah, I actually don't."

Casey Winters (00:34:22):
Well, I would say no one gets to it super intuitively.

Lenny (00:34:27):
Any advice for either as a employee at a company with a founder like that or leader, of just how to push back and help the founder understand, "Maybe you should let go and trust people to make decisions"?

Casey Winters (00:34:40):
I think the first thing is you have to understand that it's their company, not yours, and the founders have impossible jobs. They're not going to scale perfectly with the needs of the company. It's just something's going to be off. It may be because there's a whole lot of hubris by being the one of a thousand startups that made it, or they just have personal styles, but they can run the company any way they want.

(00:35:08):
I think it's sometimes surprising when founders actually want to run things suboptimally. I think we've seen examples where founders just want to build cool shit versus focusing on what customers want, or they're too obsessed with the design. They're always rebranding, redesigning things in ways that confuse customers. Of course, that's going to happen and those are some of the worst cases. I think if you do state your point, you've actually built up the expertise, you're confident and you are refuted for whatever reasons, you have to find ways to be contrarian and prove you're right. 

(00:35:43):
Different founders have different forms of feedback they listen to. It might be talking to other CEOs, or other operators, or trusted advisors, certain customers. Some might be very data-oriented, so you just run the experiment and ask for forgiveness after you proved it works, whatever. Everyone's got a different thing they respond to. You try to figure out what actually influences the CEO and build that case, whether it's through an experiment, the right customer intro, the right external advisor. If they rebuke that as well, then you got to disagree and commit, or find a new company to join, or start your own. Like I said, it's their company. They can make the call.

(00:36:25):
I remember when I joined Pinterest, I was just coming off 100X increase in user growth from Grubhub. I was ready to drive the same sort of impact at Pinterest, but no one knew who I was. I didn't come from Facebook or Google like most of the other people, or Pinterest. No one gave a shit about Chicago startups at the time, so when they didn't trust my proposals, I just went and talked to the heads of growth at all the startups they did respect. I talked to Dropbox, I talked to Facebook. When they said all the same things I was saying but I said that they said it, not me, that was, sadly, more convincing. I didn't care because I still got what I wanted out of it, which is to do the right thing to grow the company.

Lenny (00:37:09):
Now you're one of those people that people go to. If Casey says it, it's probably the right way to do it.

Casey Winters (00:37:13):
Whether I'm correct or not, it is a role I sometimes play in the ecosystem, I will admit.

Lenny (00:37:17):
Is there an example where you were convinced something was the right way to go and the founder at one of the companies you worked at had a different opinion and they had ended up being right.

Casey Winters (00:37:25):
When I was at Grubhub, one of the ideas one of the founders came up with was to build an app for delivery drivers. At the time, restaurants had their own delivery drivers. They did not work for us. We wanted to build an app for the delivery drivers so you could see where the food was along the way, so you could know if it's five minutes away, whatever. Domino's was the first to have done this at the time, and we thought that would make a bunch of sense.

(00:37:48):
I was just like, "How am I supposed to convince the delivery driver, who doesn't have a relationship with us, to download the app from Grubhub, to actually turn it on, to create anxiety for the consumer of they maybe didn't take the right turn or, whatever?" I was like, "I don't think this makes sense. No one's going to use it," and Mike and Matt overruled me and pushed us to do it. 

(00:38:10):
In the long run, it ended up being quite necessary because of the innovations around DoorDash, and Postmates, and later, Uber Eats having their own delivery network and us needing to counter that. That's, of course, a key piece of technology that needs to have parity with those new services. That was an area where perhaps, they were thinking a little bit more longer term than I was, and I was not able to get where they were going on the longer-term time horizon of how this would be actually ultimately adopted and useful.

Lenny (00:38:39):
This is an awesome segue to the next area, but real quick, how did they get drivers to start using this app? Was there anything really clever they did?

Casey Winters (00:38:45):
I think it was fairly low adoption for a while, and leveraging basically restaurant authority. If we're able to push on our restaurant customers effectively to say like, "Hey, if you use this, it'll get you more orders. We'll get you prominence in the UI," things like that to then push down to their direct relationships with the drivers to get them to adopt.

Lenny (00:39:10):
Awesome. This episode is brought to you by Ahrefs. You probably know Ahrefs as one of the leading all-in-one SEO tools used by companies like Facebook, Uber, Shopify, LinkedIn, Pinterest, and thousands more, but Ahrefs is not just for big companies. With their new Ahrefs webmaster tools, you can optimize your personal website like a professional for free. You can scan your website for over a hundred common SEO issues that might be hurting your performance in search engines, plus get advice on how to fix those errors.

(00:39:39):
You can have it automatically browse your website's internal and external links and get actionable insights from your backlink profiles, and you can learn what keywords your website ranks for and see how you stack up against your competitors. Visit ahrefs.com/awt and start improving your website's visibility. That's ahrefs.com/awt.

(00:40:00):
Okay. Shifting to our last topic that I was excited to chat about is around network effects, and marketplaces, and SaaS, and how those things connect. I feel like you have the clearest way of thinking about and explaining network effects, so maybe just to start, can you just simply explain what is a network effect and then the different types of network effects that exist?

Casey Winters (00:40:21):
Yeah. No pressure after you say that. Yeah, so at it's core, a network effect is when a product or a business gets better with more users or customers using it. There's three types that I tend to focus on. The first and probably the most well-known is called direct network effects. That's when every additional user makes the product better for all the existing users. When someone joins WhatsApp, other people can talk to them that wouldn't be able to talk to them before, and that makes WhatsApp valuable, more valuable for everyone.

(00:40:55):
Then there are cross-side network effects where there's two distinct types of users, and adding an additional user on one side of the network makes it more valuable for all the types of users on the other side of the network and vice-versa. When a restaurant joins Grubhub, it creates more selection for users to order food, and when more users start ordering more food, Grubhub becomes more attractive for restaurants to join so they can make more money from delivery orders.

(00:41:21):
The last network effect I focus on is data network effects. That's when the quality or cost of something improves as more data is collected through the product. When you say content to Pinterest, to a board, it gives Pinterest signal on the quality of that content, its relevance to other pieces of content, since they're shared to the same board, and more signal on your preferences. This allows Pinterest to better recommend more content to you as well as to other people who look like you and share similar interests.

(00:41:55):
One thing that's tricky about these network effects is most people talk about network effects in the context of social network, not marketplaces or SaaS like my background. The thing that's really tricky in understanding social networks is they're traditionally described as these direct network effect businesses, but all of them have to become either cross-side and/or data and network effect businesses over time. The only companies that stay direct network effect businesses are these pure communication tools like Messenger, iMessage, WhatsApp. There isn't a clear path to make money with those, but you want to sell ads, you're becoming a cross-side network effect business. Also, creators verse consumers creates a cross-side network effect business. If you want to get better at personalization, guess what? You're recommending content by leveraging data network effects.

Lenny (00:42:45):
I love that. You nailed it. I imagine marketplace founders listening to this may be wondering, "Hey, can I add on these additional network effects? Can I evolve towards one of these?" What you're saying is not only can you, you need to, eventually.

Casey Winters (00:42:58):
I agree. I think they're a great form of defensibility, first off. Do they make sense for every business? No, but in a lot of cases, in order for you to evolve properly and continue to grow, they can become a necessity.

Lenny (00:43:11):
Are there any other examples of marketplace companies that come to mind that did a great job evolving or adding one of these network effects or are just interesting?

Casey Winters (00:43:19):
Let's take some inventory. I think Zillow is really interesting in that a real estate listing site is not particularly an interesting product, but the ability of saying, very rarely do both sides of this network, people who are buying homes and selling homes need to connect, but I can find a way for the brand to connect with both of them by giving real time pricing information on the value of homes, and that creates a much stickier product for both sides. I think that was a pretty genuine innovation that other people have tried and rarely been as successful with. That's one that definitely sticks with me off the top of my head.

Lenny (00:44:04):
Great. We've been talking about Grubhub a lot. Grubhub had some pretty strong network effects, in large part, thanks to the work you did. One of the benefits of network effects is it creates a barrier to entry. It's hard to replicate and compete with a company where they already have all this network effect, but famously, Grubhub got disrupted by DoorDash and Uber Eats. Maybe you can talk about how that happened and why that happened. It'd be cool to hear just like, what do you think they could have done differently and what happened where their network effect got eaten for lunch? Pun intended.

Casey Winters (00:44:35):
Sure. It's a great question. I think people do mistake any form of network effect as this perfect form of defensibility. They're the best form of defensibility, but that doesn't mean they're immune to disruption. I think the main way this happens with cross-side network effects that we typically talk about for marketplaces is when a disruptor dramatically expands selection. I want to be clear, I left Grubhub at the end of 2013 before said lunch was eaten, so what I'm communicating is more like public knowledge of watching these amazing companies compete, rather than being inside the fire at the time.

Lenny (00:45:10):
Great. 

Casey Winters (00:45:11):
But one important thing to remember is Grubhub was an asset-light marketplace model. Restaurants did their own delivery through their own delivery drivers that they hired. I wrote this post for Andreessen Horowitz a few years ago about supply strategies and marketplaces, so in that you really need to be comprehensive or have exclusive inventory, and Grubhub strived to be comprehensive. We'd show every restaurant that delivered to you, even if we didn't work with them directly for online ordering. What happened about a year before I left Grubhub was that these competitors started to raise their seed rounds or series As to build delivery networks.

(00:45:51):
Postmates and DoorDash were the first two that rose to prominence. Uber Eats would come later, but they actually started with a pretty different business model, and this is an extremely different business. You're hiring drivers, you're managing logistics. We call this a heavily managed marketplace model, as you are now facilitating the transaction versus just connecting buyers and sellers and taking payments like Grubhub did. 

(00:46:18):
On the one hand, you have Grubhub, this extremely high-margin business, and these businesses coming up are actually negative-margin businesses. At least they were for a long time. In 2013, Grubhub acquired Seamless, its closest competitor at the time. Seamless still had a lead on Grubhub in New York, partially because it had this corporate program where law firms, and banks, and consultants got lunch stipends you had to redeem by ordering the food through Seamless. Grubhub operated in these dense cities and suburbs like in New York because those were really places that had restaurants that had delivery.

(00:46:58):
DoorDash, when it started, operated in less dense suburbs and worked with restaurants that had never done delivery before, and they would provide the delivery drivers themselves. This allowed DoorDash to grow without much competition in the early days. These companies also took some real gambles. One of the things they did is they delivered from restaurants they didn't have an agreement with, and that caused controversy and lawsuits. What it meant is when these companies did launch in the cities to go after Grubhub, it felt like DoorDash, and Postmates, and Uber had dramatically larger selection of restaurants to choose from, and Grubhub was definitely no longer near comprehensive. 

(00:47:40):
Back when we talked about cross-side network effects, the more selection of restaurants, the more attractive it is to users and vice-versa. At that point, Grubhub's put in a very peculiar position. It had gone public after raising $80 million in venture capital and raising a $100 million in an IPO, telling investors it's an extremely profitable, high-growth, asset-light marketplace, but now it's got disruption pressure from operationally intensive negative-margin delivery services that were raising $100 million every six months from the private markets.

(00:48:14):
What Grubhub assumed is that these businesses were just structurally unprofitable, and that VCs would stop subsidizing them eventually. Of course, that didn't happen. They kept raising more money. DoorDash eventually raised multiple billions of dollars in this market. Part of what they used that money for was to lock up agreements with national chains, which Grubhub never worked with. It was always like the local mom and pops, and promotions and discounts on the demand side. All of this is happening, and then the pandemic hits, and all of those negative margins turned positive for DoorDash for the first time, if I understand things correctly. 

(00:48:53):
On top of that, all this corporate ordering that we got from Seamless no longer mattered because no one goes to the office anymore, so this gambit really paid off and DoorDash just took the market. Grubhub then tried to copy the approaches of DoorDash and Postmates. They wrote this famous letter saying that they still thought the approaches were stupid, but their hand was forced, which is kind of funny to read in retrospect. A lot of armchair thinkers are like, "How could Grubhub have been so stupid to let DoorDash take the market that they built?" 

(00:49:24):
Look, I'll admit Grubhub made some mistakes, but I think it would have been extremely hard for Grubhub to come out on top here. Let's say in 2014 after you IPO, you do actually think what DoorDash, Postmates, and Uber are doing are smart. What do you do? Go to investors that you promised high growth and high profits and say you need to raise more money in debt to compete with negative-margin upstarts in a way that will destroy all that potential profit you mentioned? The stock would drop 90%. A lot of your employees would leave because their stock is now worthless. On top of that, building a delivery network is a heavy operations play that matches none of your core competencies, so to me, that feels like a death sentence.

(00:50:10):
I think the only play here was to buy DoorDash as early as possible, and let DoorDash and their operationally-heavy culture eat Grubhub from the inside out. I think Grubhub probably could have acquired them multiple times. For whatever reason, it never happened. It would have seemed pretty risky had Grubhub done that. Investors probably would have hated it, but it would have been their Netflix moment, where Netflix bet it all on streaming and they bet right. This is all incredibly easy to say in hindsight. 

(00:50:43):
I think what I've learned now that I'm more senior in my career is during existential threats, it's like when Nassim Taleb says, "The only rational reaction is overreaction." Unless you have a real viable reason to assume otherwise, you got to assume the disruptor is right and base your strategy on them playing an optimal game. Whereas, I think Grubhub assumed the disruptor was wrong and that it would all play out eventually in their favor, and it clearly didn't.

Lenny (00:51:14):
Wow. I have never heard that full story. That was amazing. Thank you for getting in so much detail there.

Casey Winters (00:51:19):
I don't know how much of it is right, but-

Lenny (00:51:22):
It seems right, from the outside. It's interesting that it's like a version of innovator's dilemma. Usually, innovator's dilemma is people come and do something cheaper at the low end of the market. In this case, it was more they were doing something that they didn't believe would scale. It was just much more inefficient-

Casey Winters (00:51:36):
Correct. 

Lenny (00:51:36):
... even though it was a better experience. Is that innovator's dilemma, or is that some other version of innovator's dilemma? Because to your point, they couldn't almost go after it.

Casey Winters (00:51:45):
I think it is in spirit, for sure.

Lenny (00:51:48):
The takeaway there that you've learned is don't underestimate someone that's trying to do something that's going to eat your lunch eventually, even though it feels like a terrible business model.

Casey Winters (00:52:00):
Right. If the market's rewarding it, the market will probably find a way to make it profitable. It's essentially, when everyone's find a more efficient network effect for demand on the marketplace side, you probably need to copy that as soon as possible, and if you can't copy it, own it, buy it. I think we've seen this a few times. Rover and Wag was another interesting example of this, where they found a more frequent use case that fit the same supply and demand, and Rover just copied it as soon as possible. That ended up working out for them in a way that it didn't as much for Grubhub.

Lenny (00:52:37):
I just did a talk recently on marketplace growth strategy, and someone asked me a really interesting question. "If you were trying to go up against a DoorDash or an Uber today, what would you do?" My answer is just like, money was so freely available at that point that they were able to ... A lot of this was spend. They had so much money raised. You said they were raising $100 million every six months. Is it even possible in today's climate, where you can't actually raise that much money, to have any sort of chance to beat a DoorDash or an Uber?

Casey Winters (00:53:05):
Yeah, clearly, they took advantage of the zero interest rate environments that we talked about earlier. That is not a replicable strategy in 2023. Any approach to compete with them has to be competing on a very different angle because, yeah, they can spend you into the dust. We'll see if anyone's able to build a way that creates new supply in market. I think you and I have seen a couple of earlier stage examples of that. We'll see if any of them scale, or something that feels cheaper or more fun on the demand side. That would be another way to potentially disrupt things. 

(00:53:40):
I think another thing that was working pretty well before the pandemic in building disrupters was focusing on the pickup use case, which DoorDash cannot do as easily. They've tried, but their whole value prop is the delivery network, which you don't need for pickup. Of course, the pandemic put a lot of those startups grinding to a halt as well. There's always angles, but you're going to need to be incredibly clever because just attacking with a war chest is not really going to work. 

Lenny (00:54:09):
Yeah. I noticed a lot of startups launching that are trying to do white label delivery for restaurants so they don't have to rely on DoorDash, but maybe that's a wedge to get in, and eventually they do the DoorDash sort of thing. 

Casey Winters (00:54:20):
Yeah, and I would say I'm pretty skeptical of those because they're just not really building the network effects on the demand side. They're just more like SaaS businesses. I think those struggle to be multi-$100 million in revenue businesses because the take rate is typically like a third or a fourth of what a DoorDash can charge.

Lenny (00:54:39):
Perfect segue to my next question, and I only have a couple more. There's this concept and I think pull from marketplace founders to add a SaaS tool, eventually, and have both business models. Then there's often the reverse, where a SaaS company wants to add a marketplace. I know this question is something you get a lot, and so just a question for you. Does this work? Are there examples where they've added this additional way of making money? Which direction do you find is most often successful and not successful? 

Casey Winters (00:55:11):
The canonical example that a lot of these founders use is OpenTable. That always felt really unfulfilling to me because it's very old at this point. Probably the younger people listening to the podcast are like, "What's OpenTable?" I think that business has incredibly underperformed the market it operated in. It had a good exit. It sold for $2.6 billion, I think, to Booking.com, but Booking subsequently wrote that value down below a billion, so that's not really the outcome I think we're looking for, traditionally, in marketplaces.

Lenny (00:55:43):
Maybe explain what it was initially, the SaaS tool versus a financial marketplace. 

Casey Winters (00:55:47):
Oh, sure. OpenTable promised both a SaaS tool that would help you understand what tables are open and where to seat people, so for the host in the front of the house in a restaurant, but also bring in additional reservations to fill up your restaurant. Because I think what people misunderstand about restaurants is they're, "Oh, these restaurants are these incredibly low-margin businesses." It's like, yeah, they are because they're paying the rent no matter what. 

(00:56:14):
Once you're already paying the rent no matter what happens, you're incentivized to pump as much food out the kitchen and to get as many people seated in-house as possible. People would say like, "Oh, Grubhub and DoorDash are charging too much." It's like, no, delivery orders and catering orders are basically pure margin to restaurants. The chefs are already there. The rent is already being paid. "The more things we pump out of the kitchen, the more money we make," which is why restaurants are willing to pay higher fees. These restaurants are not stupid. They're not being misinformed. OpenTable, well before there were any delivery startups, was like, "We're going to fill up your tables, and we're going to give you software that helps you manage your tables most effectively to make the most profit." 

Lenny (00:57:01):
Got it. Okay, great. If you've got-

Casey Winters (00:57:05):
That's OpenTable. Look, this is definitely the strategy we are working on with Eventbrite, where we started with something that was more SaaS-like, enabling easy payments and certain tools to make event creators' business more efficient, and we're layering in more of the traditional marketplace value prop of demand, driving more ticket sales for these event creators. I would say it's got a ways to go to be working really well. 

(00:57:29):
What does working really well look like? It's when the marketplace model unlocks those cross-side network effects that make it easier to grow. Event creators, when Eventbrite started, they would just go do their own marketing to bring people to Eventbrite to transact on their events that they had listed there. Now Eventbrite drives 25% of the ticket sales itself, and that percentage is growing faster than-

Lenny (00:57:52):
Oh, wow. That's amazing.

Casey Winters (00:57:52):
Yeah. It's growing faster than the rest of the business, which is great, but it probably needs to be closer to 50% to unlock those really cross-side network effects. That would mean that creators start selecting Eventbrite because of all the demand Eventbrite has versus the quality of the SaaS tools. That's obviously something we're working on. Faire is a company I advised more recently that I think has unlocked this model in the reverse, where Faire is a wholesale marketplace between independent retailers and brands so that you could sell products at these retailers, like a boutique in your local neighborhood. 

(00:58:29):
Faire built the marketplace first, and then it later built a SaaS tool that allowed the brands to onboard their current retailers into the platform and get better terms on payments and free returns. It didn't charge anything to use the SaaS tool for any rebookings that happened through that platform. What that did is it onboarded more independent retailers that they could cross-sell to other brands without needing to use a sales team. When they cross-sold, of course, Faire did take their percentage on those transactions. I think that model's worked out really well, and Faire has grown quite quickly. 

Lenny (00:59:06):
The examples you gave, Eventbrite was a SaaS tool trying to add a marketplace. 

Casey Winters (00:59:10):
Yep. 

Lenny (00:59:10):
Faire is an example of a marketplace adding a SaaS tool. Is the takeaway there that it's, in your experience, it's generally more ... You're going to have a better time if you're a marketplace adding a SaaS tool versus the other way around? 

Casey Winters (00:59:24):
Yeah. I think that's right. I think, I don't know when it was. Just maybe like 2015 or whatever. A bunch of investors started writing about SaaS to marketplace transitions, and that's the transition Eventbrite's going through. It's going to work, but it's hard. It's not replicable for a lot of other SaaS businesses. You need to have a direct relationship with your customers' customers, first off. Those customers need to have needs beyond that single supplier.

(00:59:50):
Usually, it's like a discovery value prop for other suppliers, and you need to build this totally new skill set to build tools for your customer's customer, who is very different from your current customer. Whereas, marketplace is that added SaaS component. It's a customer acquisition tool like Faire, or a workflow, or a retention tool to increase retention or reduce disintermediation. I think you'll see that be a lot more common approach and much more replicable. 

Lenny (01:00:20):
Is this just rooted in the fact that marketplaces are incredibly hard, no matter whether you start with them or whether you add them? Is that the root of the issue here?

Casey Winters (01:00:28):
I think that's a good way to frame it. If you're building a startup in 2023 and you're like, "Oh, I'm going to build a SaaS business, and then five years later, I'm going to build this marketplace business on top of that," it's kind of like it's going to take a long time for you to de-risk the hardest part of that strategy. Whereas, if you get the hard part done upfront, it opens up a lot of amazing adjacencies, different ways to grow. I think there's definitely truth in that statement. 

Lenny (01:00:54):
The takeaway here is that if you're trying to add a marketplace, it's going to be very hard. You shared a couple things, a couple attributes that tell you that maybe it might work. Maybe just share those again real quick.

Casey Winters (01:01:07):
Take Square, or Substack, or Patreon, or Eventbrite. All of these are examples of SaaS businesses that in providing a SaaS service, deal with the customer and the customer's customer. That makes it a lot easier because you already have a relationship. They already know your brand, whereas, Stripe, we buy things. We don't know if we're buying it through Stripe. It's just a SaaS tool that's white labeled on the backend. We have no idea. I think that's the first element. There's a lot of businesses that look like that, but it is a subset of SaaS businesses that look like that.

(01:01:38):
Then secondly, those customers that you're building a relationship with, they need to have a reason to transact with more than one of your current customers on the supply side, so if you're always going to use that same supplier, there's no need for me to show you the rest of the inventory.

(01:01:57):
Basically, all marketplaces win on, like we mentioned, selection and you needing selection. Then there's, of course, the marketplaces that win with standardization of like, I can get it at any time. It might be from different people, but I know that Uber car is going to be there in five minutes, or whatever. I don't care as much who the driver is. One of those has to be there. You just find in a lot of these examples, there isn't really that much of a discovery need for who the demand side would be in this theoretical marketplace when you dig into it. 

Lenny (01:02:31):
It might be helpful just to define what makes it a marketplace. In my eyes, it's you're driving demand through supply. That's like the nuance, right? Because otherwise, you're just a tool that they're using to do something they want to do. 

Casey Winters (01:02:42):
Yeah. Exactly, right. It's like the primary value prop of why supply signs up is that you're going to bring them extra business. If you have customer, buyers and sellers, but the primary reason supply signs up is for tooling or payments like how Eventbrite started, that's not really a marketplace. I call it a SaaS-like network. Some people might just call it a SaaS business, a payments business, whatever the case may be, but it doesn't really have those cross-side network effects that we associate with marketplaces.

Lenny (01:03:10):
What this makes me think about is Patreon and Substack. Interestingly, when I was looking at early Patreon days, what I understand is they wanted to be a marketplace. They wanted to be a place where artists come. They collect payment, and then people can discover artists to patronize. What they found is nobody needed ... That wasn't a problem anyone had. 

Casey Winters (01:03:29):
Exactly, exactly. 

Lenny (01:03:30):
I'm not looking for- [inaudible 01:03:31]

Casey Winters (01:03:30):
I'm not looking for other people to donate money to. Same with GoFundMe, right?

Lenny (01:03:33):
With that story in mind, when I was chatting with the Substack people early on, it was like this is exactly what you're going to run into. No one's sitting around looking for more newsletters to subscribe to, but shockingly, they've actually pulled it off. 

Casey Winters (01:03:47):
Yeah. 

Lenny (01:03:47):
They have a really wild network effect going now and marketplace. 

Casey Winters (01:03:50):
I've been very impressed with what they've built. I don't know if I'd call it a marketplace yet, but I think they were able to abstract a way, the version of what you just said to something that was actually useful, which is, yes, I don't want more emails to subscribe to, but I do ... I am fundamentally interested in more articles relevant to my interests. No one has really solved that super well. 

(01:04:15):
Twitter was a very hacky form of that, where I follow you and then I see you when you post a new blog because you tell everyone on Twitter you posted a new blog, but it isn't built for that. Whereas the Substack reader will now allow me to be like, "Ah, yeah. Sure, I'll subscribe," so I really like what they've done. It'll be interesting to see how big a business that is and how it all plays out. I think their execution has been really solid. 

Lenny (01:04:39):
Awesome. I feel the same way. I also wasn't sure whether it makes ... it's worth calling a marketplace, but for whatever it's worth, 80% of my new signups are coming from Substack's network, the recommendations feature and their onboarding, things like that. Like-

Casey Winters (01:04:52):
Do you think that's unique to you because you're already a top one percenter Substacker? Or is that a meaningful number for new-ish players? If I finally switch my email list to Substack, which has been on my list for a long time, that probably won't be the same percentage for me, right? 

Lenny (01:05:11):
Absolutely not. Yeah, no, I think there's definitely, if you're there first and people know of you, more people will recommend you. I think, over time, more and more people start to recommend you. I think they released a stat that something like 40% of their new users are coming from a recommendation, or new signups or something like that. It's pretty widely happening, but I don't know how much-

Casey Winters (01:05:31):
That's excellent. 

Lenny (01:05:32):
... of that is just the top 10, so it's pretty incredible. It was a really innovative feature and good job, Substack. We had a product on this podcast talking about that exact feature for a whole hour, if you're interested. 

Casey Winters (01:05:43):
Awesome. 

Lenny (01:05:43):
Okay. Final question, and then we have our very exciting lightening round. This is around consumer companies and consumer subscription companies. I know you work with a lot of founders that are building consumer subscription companies, and just consumer startups in general. 

Casey Winters (01:05:57):
Yep.

Lenny (01:05:58):
You often tell me how they're incredibly hard to build into thriving businesses. Can you just talk about why consumer subscription startups are so hard and products are so hard? 

Casey Winters (01:06:07):
I feel like we're making this quite a downer podcast, Lenny, but-

Lenny (01:06:10):
This is, people need to hear the truth. There's a lot of happy talk out there, and a lot of posts, "Here's how you do this."

Casey Winters (01:06:16):
Sure. 

Lenny (01:06:17):
Sometimes, you can't.

Casey Winters (01:06:18):
I think in order to understand these businesses, you have to start with, why do investors like B2B SaaS? Why do they like B2B subscription? I think the way most people respond to that question, they say like, "Oh, predictable revenue, right?" It's like, ah, sure. That's cool and all, but I think that's actually not the most important. I'd argue there's two great attributes of B2B SaaS. One is that businesses are more predictable in how well they're routine. They're rational. You can understand who are good versus bad businesses for your product, as well as which ones are going to grow versus go out of business. 

(01:06:53):
More importantly, the second thing that's great about B2B SaaS is net dollar retention. What is net dollar retention if you don't work at SaaS? Well, as a SaaS company, some of your customers are going to churn. Some of your customers are going to stay. Normally, normally outside of potentially current macroeconomic conditions with all the layoffs, when customers do stick around, they tend to spend more. Either they buy more seats if you're a seat-based model, or they use the product more if you're a usage model. The SaaS company just makes more money in year two, year three, et cetera. 

(01:07:27):
Consumer subscription just doesn't have any of these benefits. Consumers are way less predictable. They tend to retain worse than businesses, and they also don't have net dollar retention characteristics. If the user retains paying you in year two, you probably making the same amount that you made from them in year one, not more. What that means is you need higher user-based retention than B2B SaaS businesses with more unpredictable users, and it's a lot higher than, I think, founders tend to think. We're talking annual retention that needs to be north of 60, perhaps even 70%.

(01:08:04):
You look at who's actually been able to do that at scale, and it's a really small list. Netflix in the U.S., Amazon Prime, Spotify, Duolingo, I think, is emerging as one of these players that's making it work. When you look at how they do it, they're either doing it with massive OPEX and economies of scale, or through a network effect, or some other bespoke growth loop that's not that easy to replicate. Duolingo has a strong data network effect. The lessons get better the more people use it. Beek, the company I'm on the board of has a cross-side network effect between creators who create the content and the listeners, and the creators bring a lot of distribution from their existing social networks to bring new people in the app to listen. Netflix and Amazon, they spend billions of dollars on content. 

(01:08:58):
I think the default path of like, "I'm going to spend money on paid acquisition. I'm going to retain half of my audience year-over-year." That's just a path to go on eventually. I think what's interesting about these businesses is you can model it so you can learn when it's going to happen. You can learn when the retention dips, and when you can no longer profitably acquire users. If you want to look at a model in real time, just look at Blue Apron. The company raised $300 million in an IPO that valued it at $2 billion. It's worth $50 million today on the New York Stock Exchange. 

(01:09:35):
I think people understand now, if they didn't before, that paid acquisition tends to get worse as you scale. You target the best customers first. They have great conversion, great retention, and then as you expand your targeting of new customers, every one of those metrics gets worse until it's no longer profitable. Maybe two years from now, it may be be five years from now, but eventually, it'll be no longer profitable. What network effects allow you to do is they allow your product to get better faster than the customers you target get worse, normally, through increased selection, like some of the examples we gave with DoorDash and others.

Lenny (01:10:11):
This is such a cool topic. I actually have a post about this that I recalled now as you're talking about it. Just to double-click on the retention point and it's like, freaks you out when you really get into it. That say your retention is like 70% cohort retention for a year. I forget the math, but every three or four years, you basically have to rebuild your entire user base because it just, it keeps trickling out, so your growth just has to continue-

Casey Winters (01:10:34):
It's mind-boggling. You run out of humans. Yeah, it's really hard. If you can retain people incredibly well, meaning those people just never churn, yeah, you've got a great business, but look at the effort the companies that have done that are doing to do that. Spotify doesn't make profit. Netflix, Amazon just spend so much money to try to do that. How replicable is that for a startup? I'd rather say like, "Let's try and get some network effects involved here. Let's get our customer acquisition cost to zero. Let's think about other ways to monetize because this alone feels like [inaudible 01:11:07]." 

Lenny (01:11:08):
This is also why a lot of these companies pivot to B2B. They realize they're not going to get anywhere with B2C. The other lesson I took away ... Because I interviewed a lot of these early B2C subscription app founders and employees, and I think about companies like Grammarly, Duolingo, Noom. Forget. There are a few more. One of the other trends across them all is they're all very efficient and very small for a long time because they needed time to figure out how to make anything work and then just continue to stay small and super scrappy.

Casey Winters (01:11:37):
I think that's a great point. It was an interesting case study between Calm and Headspace. Because Calm remained like 10 people forever.

Lenny (01:11:44):
Wow. 

Casey Winters (01:11:45):
Headspace had gone into like hundreds of people. Calm basically never lost money, and that allowed them to pivot easier during massive changes, like app tracking transparency threw a wrench into all paid acquisition. If you're not losing money, cool. You have time to figure out how to grow again, but if that increases your burn by like $100 million, you have a lot more of a panic on your hands. 

Lenny (01:12:12):
Maybe just to tie the loop, tie the knot, close the thread on this topic, if you're a B2C subscription founder, what would be some takeaways that you would want to put in their head to think about how to maybe survive? 

Casey Winters (01:12:26):
Yeah, so if what your plan is is to use paid acquisition on top of a freemium model to get a percentage of people to convert, and hopefully, stick around forever, I'd pivot right now. It's like, I just cannot see it working. How do you pivot? Well, how do you make it social so that people are bringing in other people? How do you get a supply side to the content, or education, or whatever you're building and make it in the supply side's interest to refer people?

(01:12:55):
You have to do something that's either building some more organic growth loops into the business, or building network effects into the business, or else we could go spend two hours and model out exactly when you're going to run out of money. It's just that predictable. A lot of founders don't like to hear it when I tell them that, but I'd rather them hear it now than learn it three years from now.

Lenny (01:13:15):
Well, we've reached our very exciting lightening round. I'm just going to dive right in. What are two or three books that you've most recommended to other people? 

Casey Winters (01:13:23):
Definitely The Goal by Eliyahu Goldratt, which explains how my brain works, pretty well. Thinking, Fast and Slow by Danny Kahneman. I took a lot of the behavioral economics classes in my MBA program, and then his book came out the year after, so I just absorbed it as quick as possible. 

Lenny (01:13:48):
Was he your professor, or that was just the topic?

Casey Winters (01:13:51):
Some of his pupils were professors of mine, yeah. 

Lenny (01:13:54):
Amazing. Very cool.

Casey Winters (01:13:57):
Then the third is a book called Profit from the Core by Chris Zook.

Lenny (01:14:02):
Amazing. That's a new one. I love when there's new books being added to the collection. 

Casey Winters (01:14:05):
There you go.

Lenny (01:14:06):
Okay. Next question. Favorite recent movie or TV show?

Casey Winters (01:14:11):
Well, Party Down just came back and that's like-

Lenny (01:14:14):
I've been watching that.

Casey Winters (01:14:15):
That's one of my favorite-

Lenny (01:14:16):
I'd never heard of it. 

Casey Winters (01:14:16):
It's one of my favorite comedies of all time. Yeah, go back-

Lenny (01:14:18):
Cool.

Casey Winters (01:14:19):
Go back and watch the first couple seasons if you haven't. 

Lenny (01:14:20):
That's what I've been doing. That's what I've been doing. 

Casey Winters (01:14:21):
Okay. Great, great. Other things like The Last of Us is great. I really enjoyed the video games. Severance is great. Station Eleven is great. I loved the book too, but I thought that was really good. Movies, there haven't really been a lot of great movies lately, but I did rewatch Kicking and Screaming from the '90s. I think it really holds up well. I don't know how many of you have heard it, but it's about a group of college kids who graduate, but they just decide not to leave campus and start their lives, and they just stick around campus. I really enjoyed that one.  

Lenny (01:14:58):
Amazing. We have a drinking game any time someone mentions Last of Us, so if you're driving to work listening to your podcast on your commute, take some coffee or whatever you got. 

(01:15:09):
Two more questions. What's something relatively minor you've changed in your product development process, or maybe that you've recommended people change that has had a tremendous impact on people's ability to execute?

Casey Winters (01:15:21):
I preach cross-functional teams and alignment pretty aggressively, so how to get people from all the different functions aligned on the same OKRs and working together. I used to say like, "Look, if someone in that cross-functional team is pulling rank, it means something's fucked up on the team." 

(01:15:39):
Something we started doing more recently at both Eventbrite and Whatnot is just designating the person on the cross-functional team who drives the project. At Eventbrite, we call it the driver. At Whatnot, we call it the DRI, directly responsible individual. Once that person makes the call, it's disagree and commit time. There's no escalation path. If you're not the DRI and you're on the team and they made the call, all right. It's time to sign up and go forward on that decision. If they made the wrong decision later, okay, we'll learn once we ship.

Lenny (01:16:11):
Final question. Something I love that you do in your own newsletter and blog is you share what you're listening to. What are you listening to these days?

Casey Winters (01:16:19):
Sure. Kelela recently came out with her second album, Raven, which is really great. I've been listening to that. Orbital came out with a new album called Optimal Delusion that's been pretty good. Then an oldie but goodie is De La Soul's music finally came out on Spotify, and the Stakes Is High is one of my favorite hip hop albums ever, so I've been jamming to that. 

Lenny (01:16:45):
Amazing. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Casey Winters (01:16:50):
I blog not near as frequently as you at caseyaccidental.com. You can find me on Twitter @onecaseman. Yeah, just pay it forward. Help your companies build better products and better businesses. That's all I care about.

Lenny (01:17:06):
Casey, thank you so much for being here. I feel like we're building some kind of network effect, you and I, doing these podcasts. Hopefully, you'll be back for a third time someday. Thank you again. Really appreciate it. 

Casey Winters (01:17:15):
Yeah. Thanks for having me. Hopefully, they don't get sick of me by then. 

Lenny (01:17:17):
Bye, everyone.

(01:17:22):
(singing)

(01:17:22):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

(01:17:45):
(singing)

Crystal Widjaja (00:00:00):
I felt like it was a problem that was very solvable. And we ended up renting a stadium to just hire 60,000 drivers in a couple of weeks. So I think looking back, it was certainly a risk. When I got there it was in a house and I realized I've probably made a huge mistake, but we were growing very quickly already, even at that small scale of 4,000 orders per day.

Lenny (00:00:29):
Crystal Widjaja has been leading product and growth teams at some of the largest consumer businesses in Southeast Asia, including Kumu, where she's currently the chief product officer, and Gojek where she built and led the growth team through the early years of what is now the largest super app in Southeast Asia. To put this in context, Gojek completes more rights per day than Lyft and more food deliveries than GrubHub, Uber Eats and DoorDash combined, and it's the number one mobile wallet in Indonesia and Southeast Asia. In my opinion, American startups have a lot to learn from startups in Asia and Crystal has been at the ground floor of some of the biggest successes there.

(00:01:06):
In our conversation, we covered the biggest growth unlocks that Crystal has seen across the companies she's worked at, what growth investments usually pay off and which often don't, we dig into growth models, a bunch of tips for accelerating growth, why most analytics efforts fail in how to avoid that, how to hire and structure your growth team, and we also talk about the nonprofit that Crystal started that aims to help young women get into STEM called Generation Girl. Crystal is such a star, and I hope that you enjoy this episode as much as I did. And with that, I bring you Crystal Widjaja. If you're setting up your analytics stack, but you're not using Amplitude, what are you doing? Amplitude is the number one most popular analytic solution in the world used by both big companies like Shopify, Instacart, and Atlassian, and also most tech startups.

(00:01:59):
Amplitude has everything you need, including a powerful and fully self-service analytics product, an experimentation platform, and even an integrated customer data platform to help you understand your users like never before. Give your teams self-service product data to understand your users, drive conversions and increase engagement, growth, and revenue. Get your vanity metrics, trust your data, work smarter and grow your business. Try Amplitude for free. Just visit amplitude.com to get started. Hey, Ashley, head of marketing at Flatfile. How many B2B SaaS companies would you estimate need to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley (00:02:40):
At least 40%?

Lenny (00:02:40):
And how many of them screw that up, and what happens when they do?

Ashley (00:02:43):
Well, based on our data about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. So if your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common, considering customer files are chalked full of unexpected data and formatting, they'll leave.

Lenny (00:03:02):
I am zero percent surprised to hear that. I've consistently seen that improving onboarding is one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup conversion and increasing longterm retention, getting people to your aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley (00:03:17):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify and Zora are able to grow their businesses on top of Flatfile. It's because flawless data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go, faster.

Lenny (00:03:34):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out Flatfile at flatfile.com/lenny. Crystal, thank you so much for being here. I've read a bunch of your stuff online. We've exchanged a bunch of emails and tweets, but this is the first time that we're actually chatting for real, and so I'm really excited to, yeah I'm excited to learn from you and for folks to learn about you.

Crystal Widjaja (00:03:56):
We may have crossed paths on Clubhouse and the audio forums or on the Twitterverse. So it's really cool to see you.

Lenny (00:04:04):
Wow. I just remembered that. That is so right. I think we were talking about Reforge and Eppo. Is that right?

Crystal Widjaja (00:04:11):
Yes, that's right. Good times.

Lenny (00:04:11):
Oh my God. Clubhouse days.

Crystal Widjaja (00:04:13):
The days when club does was a thing. They have a thing too, to learn about exponential decay.

Lenny (00:04:18):
Oh man. Okay. Maybe we'll get to that. And we're going to be chatting a lot about consumer growth and a bunch of stuff along those lines. But before you get into that, you have a fairly unusual path and also geography as compared to many of my other guests. And so just to set a little context, could you just walk us through your career path and journey from, I think as an investment banker initially, and then currently as chief product officer at Kumu and then living in Singapore also? So yeah, tell us all about your path.

Crystal Widjaja (00:04:45):
Yeah. I think my path was certainly a nonstandard one. While I grew up in San Jose, the Bay Area, you could see companies like Lyft emerging around the year that I was graduating college. But really it was how do I graduate college as quickly as possible because this is very boring. So I took a Poli Sci major. I am not a math or a computer science major. I didn't know what a consultant was because I was just trying to get out of college. I didn't realize people start looking for jobs before they'd graduate. So the last two weeks of school I was looking on Craigslist, because I was like, "Craigslist is how everyone gets a job." I'm a first generation American student, so my parents could not help me at all with like, "You should look into this company called McKinsey," or, "Here are all of the life paths that you have ahead of you." So I ended up taking an investment banking research job.

(00:05:46):
And my job there was to figure out how to call startups and analyze their potential for VC financing or M&A advisory. And I barely knew what those words meant at the time. I ended up owning a huge Excel database of 130,000 rows, 60 plus columns. And because again, I am very impatient, I was like, "This is a terrible experience. How would I create a customer database?" And so I ended up Google fooling all of the work needed to build a MySQL database, I presented a plan, and investment banking, surprise, surprise, is not very tech forward. So they looked at my plans and they're like, "What is this MySQL thing? Isn't that super expensive? What is open source?" So I ended up leaving that job because I realized that if I wanted to get into something more tech, it would probably not be at a investment bank. So I did took the investment banking strategies that I had learned there and applied the same pattern matching to companies in Southeast Asia.

(00:06:55):
So my family originally is from Indonesia. I thought I have a kind of safety net, I must speak Indonesian really well just by birth, so maybe that's a great country for me to look at. So I took the approach of let's find a company that makes a lot of sense, that I feel I resonate with. And I literally cold called emails some companies. So Gojek being on that list. I literally emailed someone after Googling HR at Gojek and said, "I'm willing to move to Indonesia, take a bet on me." And they actually did. So I got extremely lucky. Five years fly by insanely fast. I went through building out the data team from scratch. When you have all of the data, you know how much fraud you have in the system. So then I ended up building out the fraud and risk team, picked up performance marketing, and then it was like, okay, now we're ready to grow. So you have all of this data now take on growth.

Lenny (00:07:55):
Got it. You were very modest about Gojek and the success of that company, and also Kumu where you work now. So just to set a little context for folks that aren't familiar with these companies, can you share how big they are and how big of a deal they are in Southeast Asia?

Crystal Widjaja (00:08:11):
Yeah. They are pretty massive. So Gojek is now called GoTo, they just merged with the largest eCommerce platform in Indonesia. So across Southeast Asia, we had about 170 million users. Southeast Asia has scale. If you ever wanted to work at scale, you would go to Southeast Asia. We had 20 plus different services from transportation to food, shopping, medicine delivery, bill pay, movie tickets. So it was like all of the startups in America in one app, all being built at the same time with the same user base. And so everything was tremendously layered, because you could fill all of these opportunity gaps in the market where a single app would probably not be as sustainable.

(00:09:00):
So Gojek is massive across Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam. And then Kumu is kind of a super app for social. So Gojek was very transactional. It was like, "Here's a job to be done. I want to pay for something and someone delivers it to me." And with Kumu, it's more so of a, "I want to do clubhouse, Zoom, Google Hangouts gather around all in one app." So we cover social feeds, audio, video, multi seats. There's a ton of different use cases that we serve on Kumu. And Kumu is primarily in the Philippines, but ranks top 10 and a bunch of countries as a top grossing mobile app.

Lenny (00:09:40):
So with Kumu you joined when they're already doing fairly well. But Gojek, as you said, you joined very early. What did you see in that company that helped you decide to join such a risky, early stage company? For folks that are maybe thinking about joining a startup, what kind of things did you take away of what to look for?

Crystal Widjaja (00:09:58):
Honestly, it's probably a lot of luck. But also at that age I realized I have very little to lose. So with Gojek I think I felt like it was the right company because I was able to really clearly understand the value prop. Traffic in Indonesia is crazy. It takes you two hours to go 20 kilometers. So of course you want to take a motorcycle taxi to beat that traffic. Of course, you don't want to go out and get food and then have to come back this long pathway of two hours. So I think taking that Warren Buffet approach, I knew that the product made sense. The market made sense as well. So drivers, there were already a thing, but it was very hard to connect them to the consumer.

(00:10:42):
It was painful to haggle prices. There were lots of restaurants scattered across Indonesia. So the value prop and the market made sense and the channel by which you would do it through this mobile app made a little bit less sense at the time because most drivers didn't have a mobile app, but I felt like it was a problem that was very solvable. And we ended up renting a stadium to just hire 60,000 drivers in a couple of weeks. So I think looking back, it was certainly a risk when I got there, it was in a house and I realized I've probably made a huge mistake. But we were growing very quickly already, even at that small scale of 4,000 orders per day.

Lenny (00:11:26):
I want to spend a lot of time talking about what you learned, driving growth at these companies. But one quick question. So, Gojek's the super app where you do a lot of stuff in one app. Do you have any insights into why a super app hasn't emerged in the US?

Crystal Widjaja (00:11:40):
Yeah. I think the sentimentality of a conglomerate is very different in Southeast Asia. So we've grown up with a specific conglomerate owning, not just the mall that you go to, but also the apartment building that you live in, and the school that you go to. And so they're very well integrated and there's this sense of trust in a conglomerate. Whereas in America we already shy away from, does Google know too much about me? There's also, I think, the second aspect of it, which is that in Asia, we've kind of leapfrogged to the computer era. So everyone has a phone, but you may not even have a computer in the entire household. And so when your phone is full, are you going to delete a photo of your kid or are you going to delete this app? You're probably going to delete the app. So for anyone to really survive, it has to be part of this super app concept.

Lenny (00:12:34):
Oh wow. I've never thought of it that way. That you don't have a lot of space on your phone and so you want one app to do a lot of things.

Crystal Widjaja (00:12:40):
That's right. So there's a decision factor that you don't really have in the US because the cloud storage and device capacity there is a little bit bigger.

Lenny (00:12:50):
Interesting. So in the US you can have different apps to be... Basically a super app doesn't have to be the best at everything. The fact that it does enough and everything good enough. Wow, it's fascinating.

Crystal Widjaja (00:12:59):
You just need to get the job done.

Lenny (00:13:02):
Amazing. Okay. That's super interesting. Okay. So transitioning a bit to growth and things you've learned along the way. So you talked about how, I think Gojek, you said hired tens of thousands of drivers really quickly. Are there things that startups in Asia do that you think companies in the US should do and can learn from in terms of growth?

Crystal Widjaja (00:13:22):
Yeah, so we did crazy things. If someone told you, in the US, that they were going to rent out a stadium, pre-load a bunch of mobile devices, market that drivers should come here in mass for a job fair. They're going to give them a phone and send them on their way, some people would say, "No. That's crazy. Won't we get in trouble." And to an extent, maybe that's true. So maybe there are some limitations there, but this concept of doing things that are somewhat crazy, but validate a point, doing stuff that don't scale, especially I think is really the bread and butter of what we did at Gojek. We were insanely scrappy.

(00:14:02):
We would do things as simple as wanting to test a subscription feature, which was just released in Singapore a couple weeks ago. We ended up saying, "We have this voucher system that we can distribute vouchers in the back end. We obviously know our driver's phone numbers. Why don't we just add them to a WhatsApp group?" We'll add a hundred drivers randomly to a WhatsApp group. We'll tell them, "Every time you are on a ride with a customer, try to sell them this pitch. You are the only driver who can sell a subscription package. Have the customer give you $10. Text us when they say yes. Someone will be sitting by this phone all day, every day.

(00:14:46):
We'll look up the customer that you were on a ride with in the backend, we'll give them the vouchers in the back end, and then we'll deduct $10 from your balance." It works. It's really this Wizard of Oz experience. We don't have to build anything. I coordinated with a bunch of interns and we were able to validate some of the value prop and conversion rates that we would expect in a subscription service. When we wanted to do a new onboarding screen, but turns out we have lots of engineering work to do, we took a screenshot of the screen as is, and we just had our designer put what the onboarding flow might look like if we had to overlay it on top of the screen.

(00:15:27):
And we just sent that as an in-app message. And then eventually I think finding stuff that does scale intuitively. We knew that we were sending out lots of fake features through things like Typeform surveys. Things like a personality quiz can be very easily done through Typeform. And we realized that if we built in the in-app webpage and we made it easier for us to do a website deployment on our backend side, we wouldn't have to wait for a mobile app release to test some of these new features out that could be done on web. So it's really just like, what is the user experience that we want to create? How do we manifest that as quickly as possible? Let's just try that first.

Lenny (00:16:13):
Going back to the stadium example. I know you said that you hired a stadium full of people, I didn't realize it was actually a stadium that you-

Crystal Widjaja (00:16:19):
That it was literally a stadium that we rented, like a football field, a couple football fields if I'm not wrong. It was long lines, boxes of phones and SIM cards. So it was a lot of just doing really hard work to get to that scale.

Lenny (00:16:35):
Wow. I know you do a lot of advising too. Do you advise startups to be more scrappy and do things that don't scale? I imagine because in the US the culture is a little different.

Crystal Widjaja (00:16:45):
The only thing better than knowing... If you have data of what your customers are doing, that is the best data you could ever get. And so if you don't have a tested hypothesis, if you can't think of a way to run an experiment, then honestly that idea is pretty useless. Maybe it makes sense to the market, to the model, but you could have weird consumer sentiments. Not everyone is a rational actor. So testing the actual experience and seeing how people respond to it, that's the best possible data.

Lenny (00:17:21):
Pulling that thread a little bit, for startups, experiments are often hard because there's just not enough data and enough users. How do you think startups should approach that? Can you run experiments when you're really, really early?

Crystal Widjaja (00:17:32):
You should. Even if you have a sample size of 30, the data you get back, generally, does not change but its precision will. So mathematically speaking, you're going to get the same level of trends, but the precision at which you understand those trends will become more deep if you have more data. But the underlying information that you're getting out of that won't be very different at larger scales. So what's better than having 30 data points? Certainly having 100. But what's better than having zero is definitely 30.

Lenny (00:18:10):
Fascinating. So contrarian. Running experiments at 30 people. I love that.

Crystal Widjaja (00:18:14):
You have to. Every idea is so cheap at that scale. You could do things that don't scale dramatically better with 30 people than at 100 if you're testing.

Lenny (00:18:29):
Just to pull on that a little bit, when you're running an experiment with 30 people, what do you look for? You're looking for 20 of them to do something, a large percentage of that group does something?

Crystal Widjaja (00:18:39):
So everyone wants to go on retention. They want to see that users are doing this thing, and they want to get from step zero to 100 really quickly, but they don't realize that users make decisions based on succeeding events. So what's one step before the user makes that decision? What are the things that they have to do, the things that have to be done? So we're always looking for what is a specific reason that this user might have converted? For things like GoFood it would be things like when does a user try a new merchant if what people are ordering right now or just food that they already trust and know. If you need to have trust in order to purchase food from a merchant, how do we generate that trust? So we actually hacked it by connecting people's Facebook connect login.

(00:19:33):
So we had already had permission to look at who they had connected with on Facebook. We actually looked at the food that their friends had purchased and used that as a data set of, "Hey, here's food that Lenny purchased and liked. Maybe you would like it too." And so that was one way to hack the trust factor. And we did find that when we told people, "This friend purchased from this merchant," you would be twice as likely to purchase from a brand new restaurant then users who did not have this feature. And that increases GMV, that eventually gets you to the conversion rate that you wanted, but it solved a different problem. Before how do I convert, it was how do I solve for trust? How do I break the barrier of facilitating that decision making process, that aha moment, by fixing the setup moment, which was trust?

Lenny (00:20:31):
And that's just a general rule of thumb you have. Don't use retention as a goal. I know you wrote about this somewhere. Is that a rough rule of thumb you use?

Crystal Widjaja (00:20:41):
I think a lot of people thought that I had meant retention sucks, don't care about it at all. But in reality it was really when you think about retention, that's just not specific enough. So there is this mental model that I use from made to stick where they'll tell you like, "Lenny, think of everything in the world that is orange." And you're like, "An orange. What else?" And then if you change that structure with sandbox to think of everything orange that's in a construction site, then you really start to realize and grasp at concrete concepts, and can actually action on them in real life.

Lenny (00:21:25):
Got it. Speaking of retention, where have you found products and companies have the most success increasing retention?

Crystal Widjaja (00:21:32):
It's usually the step right before conversion. So if they aren't sure why the user opens the app or they aren't sure why the user got to this checkout page, it's often some copy or the path has been ineffective in some way. I'd like to see founders think about the user psych model that Darius Contractor often talks about. So you need some momentum in that user journey to get them over the hump of some of these very painful user processes like typing in a credit card. That's a lot of work. How do you lower that friction? And being able to sequence the right steps effectively and just moving around screens actually can do a lot.

Lenny (00:22:21):
Going even deeper there. So the companies you've worked at, the companies you've advised, you're on the boards of a couple companies I noticed, what have you found to be really good uses of time in terms of growth investments, things that often work? And then a second question, what do you find is rarely successful or people invest a lot of time and ends up not being really useful for growth?

Crystal Widjaja (00:22:44):
Yeah. I think I see a lot of founders grasping at straws. So there'll be this brand new feature that does something different from what people are already doing on our app, like this will make things work. But they don't have any Wizard of Oz test, they haven't proven that people want to do that, they don't have any data of users currently trying to do that. And that's a sign of why this, instead of literally anything else that you could be doing. I do find if you have a lot of people landing on a webpage or an app and then not doing anything, then it's probably copy.

(00:23:25):
They haven't even experienced the product, it's clearly not the product that's wrong. So how can you change the copy and resonate with the pain point rather than the solution you are offering so that users understand how to fit themselves into the use case? So copy is a big one if I see conversion rates aren't landing between app launch to some first action. But if there is conversion and they're just not as frequent, I try to look at what the most painfully long conversion events are. So users who eventually check out or eventually completed the aha moment, what are the user paths, and what is the longest one that seems like it's the most painful? Are there enough people trying to do that?

(00:24:13):
And how do we shorten that cycle? So for Kumu things like users wanted to sign up and find their friends on Kumu. And so they were using search frequently, search was underutilized API, it was slow. We sped that up. Conversion rates go from 60% to 90% over the course of a few weeks of just optimizing that and putting more content there. So looking at where are people doing things and then failing, you already know this percent of people would convert if you fixed this, that's a definite potential win. So we try to layer these definite wins with crazy bets of brand new feature with no data. At least run an experiment if you can. But I always try to layer in these sure wins.

Lenny (00:25:01):
When you talk about conversion being good and bad, do you have a rule of thumb or of a mental model of here's a rough range of this is good and we should not really spend a lot of time on this and this is bad and we should optimize?

Crystal Widjaja (00:25:14):
So assuming that the frequency is correct, so you have a weekly frequency, if users are coming back, if it's a free product, 60%. It has to be at least 60%. If it's a free product, we go over a week. If it's a paid product, I usually look at that more as maybe 20 to 30%.

Lenny (00:25:32):
And this is retention, people coming back the next week?

Crystal Widjaja (00:25:34):
Exactly. Coming back in the second week or month or whenever your frequency ratio is. And this is at scale. So if you are much smaller, your friends and family that better be near close to 80% no matter what, because if you can't even convince the people who care about you to use the product, it probably isn't going to solve the job for anyone else.

Lenny (00:25:56):
Very handy. Very concrete numbers. And then your point is that when you're a startup, it's only going to go down because your early adopters that are more excited and they'll be more excited by coming back. So you want to start really high.

Crystal Widjaja (00:26:10):
Don't make the same mistake that Netflix and Spotify have made, which I guess is when they've launched, they've started international expansion and they see this very small percentage of users start to sign up for Spotify or Netflix. There are very few people though in Southeast Asia or internationally that have the types of credit cards that Spotify or Netflix would accept. And so when they launch in these markets and they see a ton of uptick in the first week, they're like, "This is only going to get better." When in reality it's like you just pulled forward everyone who could have possibly subscribed to you, now you're going to have to work a lot harder to get everyone else.

Lenny (00:26:47):
The 60% number. So you're saying it's then every week, 60% of the previous week come back, roughly. Is it just a rule of thumb?

Crystal Widjaja (00:26:54):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (00:26:55):
Is that how you think about it versus say cohort retention? Is that just because it's easier is just a simple rule of thumb?

Crystal Widjaja (00:27:01):
Am actually thinking of it as cohorts. So 60% should be your week one, and then it should flatten. I think I usually give teams two to three weeks or frequency periods to see things flatten, but it better flatten around 60% for a free product. That's actually what we saw at Gojek. Early days it was like 60, 70% retention rates because people were using this product that really solved a huge problem for them. And I think that's when I knew we were going to be fine. If people keep coming back, the product just needs to work.

Lenny (00:27:36):
Wow. So week one, 40% of people drop off week two and beyond basically nobody drops off is what you look for.

Crystal Widjaja (00:27:42):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:27:43):
Wow. What a high bar. But I like that, because-

Crystal Widjaja (00:27:47):
Yeah, well Gojek is a decacorn.

Lenny (00:27:50):
Okay. There we go. If you want to be a decacorn, there's your new benchmark. Amazing. Okay. There's a bunch of other stuff I want to dig into. One is just data modeling and thinking about growth strategy as a founder. So say a startup is just trying to think about, how do we drive growth, where do we invest, do you have a framework or a process? I know this might be a really big question, but just for founders to think about how their growth works, what their drivers might be, how would a founder approach that problem?

Crystal Widjaja (00:28:20):
For sure. So I thought that this was not an obvious process. It wasn't an explicit process until I worked with Reforge to build my data four PMs program. Got to get that plug there.

Lenny (00:28:34):
Go Reforge.

Crystal Widjaja (00:28:35):
I basically talked with the Reforge folks about here's what I would do in all of these scenarios. And they're like, "Oh, so you mean you're doing this step one, step two?" And I was like, "Yes, actually. How did you figure that out?" So I don't really think in-frame works, this is just a logical process to me. But I think what I've figured out is, it's step one, you have constraints. Similar to our sandbox example of everything in the world that's orange versus everything in a construction site, you have to think about the physics of the current market, the product, the model and the channels that you're using. So to use Gojek as an example, it would be market of Indonesia.

(00:29:16):
Here are the consumers in this market, the driver's side supply side in this market. Here is the product, mobile app. We're able to connect drivers and consumers. There is a allocation that we create model. We charge per order, channel. We are able to do this through push notifications or in acquiring new users. It might be through Facebook ads, or, and this was a really big insight for us, it's the real world. There was a physical conception of a driver in a jacket driving around the city who was marketing Gojek for us. And word of mouth actually was primarily driven by, "I saw a driver on the street, so I knew Gojek was here."

(00:29:58):
And that actually was a huge driver of all of Gojek's growth as it expanded to new cities. So step one is, what are the physics? Step two is when you think about loops and growth funnels and the quantitative inputs to each loop, does that fit into these physics or do you have to change four or five different things? So we were very careful about changing too many parameters and making too many bets on too many variables going our way. So we would always change one small thing at a time and make sure that it fit into the model.

Lenny (00:30:38):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern growth team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country and by user stage.

(00:31:16):
Eppo does all that and more. Delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic clickthrough metrics and instead uses our north star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions and payments. Eppo supports test on the front end, the back end, email marketing and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com. Geteppo.com and 10 X your experiment velocity. So step one, just to cover this, is figure out how you're growing. In Gojek's case, it was partly real world, people just seeing Gojek riding around.

Crystal Widjaja (00:31:58):
I think it's both figure out how you're growing and also the elements that you have at your disposal. What are the levers that you have that maybe you've never tried using? When we looked at our model this way, we actually realized we had underutilized the driver's capacity to drive our growth. Pun definitely intended. So in looking at the model this way, we had thought through what is our goal. We want GoPay to be much bigger than it really is. It's a E-wallet service, users are able to get access to this digital balance. How do we drive adoption? And so when we looked at the lever of we have a driver, we actually created an incentive model. So we built a very small service that would check when a driver got allocated to a customer, again, the product and the model, we would then check in the database, has this customer ever used our GoPay product before?

(00:32:59):
Did they have a digital balance? And if the answer was no, we would message the driver immediately, "Hey, this customer hasn't done a GoPay top up before. If you get them to give you cash and we deposit it into their virtual wallet, we'll give you extra money." So using them as the salesperson. You wouldn't believe how great of a salesperson someone can be when you were literally trapped in a car with them going somewhere. And so you have this captive audience, captive attention, you have someone who has the incentive to cross pay or cross sell someone into GoPay. And customers were able to feel the benefit because the driver was explaining it to them directly. There was no change to the physics, it was a lever usage.

Lenny (00:33:49):
What a devious strategy.

Crystal Widjaja (00:33:50):
It was huge. It was 60% of acquisition once we released that.

Lenny (00:33:55):
Oh my God. So for thinking through your potential levers and physics of your growth, do you think about it bottoms up, here's all the things that are going on and here's areas we can invest? Or do you have a menu of options top down of here's the 10 things it could be, it's looking like for Gojek it's these four and let's focus on that?

Crystal Widjaja (00:34:15):
Yeah. I think you always have to start from the fact that we are not wizards. It's very hard to move the physics of a universe when you are trying these new things. So start with what currently works and currently exists and where you think the biggest constraint is or the best lever is, and then fix that one piece because the entire universe isn't exploding. The world isn't changing so dramatically that your physics change. So I think rooted in reality is very important.

Lenny (00:34:50):
Got it. Okay. So it's see what's working, find the constraints. And then step two is basically what can you do to the product to optimize the funnel/loop to make it go even faster?

Crystal Widjaja (00:35:00):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:35:01):
Love that. Maybe as another example, if something comes to mind, with Kumu, how do you think of Kumu through this lens?

Crystal Widjaja (00:35:08):
Yeah. I'm always very hesitant to talk about Kumu, because there's so much competition right now and we are on the cusp of some very interesting things. But I think for Kumu, it's actually very complex because there's a lot of human emotion that is involved. With Gojek you knew if you got the job done. You made a transaction. With Kumu, how do you know if a consumer made a friend, felt like they had a genuine friendship? So you almost have to create more friction to identify users who really got past that barrier and aren't explicit with the activity that they did. So we have features that tell us if a user is really searching for this job to be done, if they really want to be part of a community, how do they fill out this?

(00:35:57):
Do they fill out the form? Do they fill out a questionnaire of many questions? Do they go through this friction just to get access to a community? So we almost create this artificial friction to help differentiate how deeply a user wants something or needs something. And if the user doesn't fill out that questionnaire, maybe they're actually looking for something else. They were looking for entertainment. They were looking for content or short form content. And so creating almost like hand razor approaches for a user to say, "I wanted this thing." We leave a lot of breadcrumbs in the app to be able to identify those paths.

Lenny (00:36:38):
Awesome. While we're on the topic of these two companies, just maybe for inspiration to founders who are thinking of ways to drive growth, what were a couple of the bigger unlocks growth wise for these two companies or even any other company that you've worked with that's interesting?

Crystal Widjaja (00:36:52):
Yeah. Definitely, in the early days it was copy. So I think if your product does something that's not super familiar, you have to tie it to something that is. So I talked about using drivers to sell GoPay. Before that, one thing that we did was to actually take someone's virtual account number and put it onto a picture of a credit card. You know what a credit card is, that's familiar to you. A lot of people didn't know what a digital wallet was. And so when they looked at this like, "Oh, okay. I have this virtual thing that acts like a credit card. It works like my debit account." Then they understood the concept a lot better.

(00:37:33):
And we actually saw top ups increase based on us, literally just sending that picture with someone's virtual account number there. So they could go to an ATM and they would just type in the card number as they would a regular debit account. And they realized that they could top up through that channel. Because that was something that was pretty interesting to us, with just how do we tie the familiarity loop back into the consumer mental model of the product and drive acquisition that way?

Lenny (00:38:02):
And that was at Gojek?

Crystal Widjaja (00:38:02):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:38:04):
Is there anything else maybe, since you don't want to talk too much about Kumu, any other advisorships or companies, examples of something that ended up working really well to help them accelerate growth?

Crystal Widjaja (00:38:14):
Things that have worked really well. So for one of the companies I work with, AB&B, they run a lot of their D2C brands in South America and globally. So one of the features that we were looking at was how do we ensure that subscriptions don't actually become a canceling point for a user. So in the app you could cancel or you could resume your subscription, but you couldn't pause it. So when we looked at the cancellation reasons and we saw that their number one reason was, I still have too much fear, we actually decided, well, let's just add a pause button then.

(00:38:58):
Because canceling the subscription is a permanent solution to having too much fear. How do you make a temporary solution that solves the actual problem? Adding in a pause button actually helped alleviate a lot of the churn that was becoming very hard to reacquire back. So that was one fix where we looked at the, again, physics of the model. We're not going to create new changes to the product or create one time buys or reactivation emails. We'll just solve the problem at that small constraint where everyone drops off.

Lenny (00:39:35):
Wait, so can you order beer as subscription? Is that a thing? Is this a consumer product or is this-

Crystal Widjaja (00:39:40):
It was a thing, yeah.

Lenny (00:39:43):
Cool. Okay. This also reminds me, at Airbnb, this was actually one of the biggest wins, is adding a snooze feature to your listing. Exactly the same thing. Yeah. All right there we go. Awesome. Tip for folks that have churn problems, snooze/pause. I want to shift a little bit to a post that you wrote that maybe is one of your more popular posts you wrote on the Reforge blog called Why Most Analytics Efforts Fail. And I'd love to hear your broad overview of why do most analytics efforts fail and then how do teams avoid this? Maybe what are two to three things they can do?

Crystal Widjaja (00:40:18):
Yeah, I'm actually pretty surprised at how much noise that has generated because I guess it came from a place of frustration where I kept telling people like, "You are doing this wrong. Here's how you should probably be doing it." But I think it resonated a lot with folks because they recognize all of those symptoms, but they weren't sure why it was happening. So to say, oh, this is the thing, instrumentation is what's wrong, I think it's a very actionable thing. It's probably one of the most solvable problems out there. It just takes some time and mental model shifts to do it well. So a lot of people look at tracking data as how do I track my OKR? How do I know if I'm going up or down? But they don't use it to track or identify insights. So I will use the example of using Twitter for "news" when in reality they're actually using Twitter for entertainment.

(00:41:17):
Do not treat metric gathering as entertainment. It's not there for you to be like, "Oh, that's interesting, how novel," and then not act on it. So real news is information that changes what you do in the real world. And if you don't change what you're doing, what you are doing is just getting entertainment. So let's use that as the premise. The next step in instrumentation is to look at the fact that measurements do not equate to insights. A measurement would be an observation. It's a data point in your database. So the example being power users do four times more bookings, is an all observed fact because your transactional database obviously says that is the case, but it's on an insight because it doesn't have context. It doesn't give you information that lets you act on it and better understand the problem.

(00:42:11):
So another example would be if I see my girlfriend hanging out with a guy I don't know, that is an observed fact that you see in the real world. Your hypothesis could be that your girlfriend is cheating on you, but the insight, the actual fact might be that she's not cheating on you, it's her cousin. And now your insight is, I am paranoid and I need to change my behavior to be less crazy. So the insight will provide value when you have this, why answered? Why is this person doing this thing? Here's why. And then you are going to act differently. So for our purposes, if we look at a GoFood user will transact and is more likely to use a voucher, that's a fact, that's an observation, but it's not an insight. An insight would be something like GoFood users who are power users are more likely to use a free shipping discount on a high GMV basket versus non-power users.

(00:43:22):
And that actually tells you how to change your marketing approach. It tells you in what circumstances does someone do this. When it's a high GMV basket, give power users the ability to get a free discount, but do not do this for non-powered users because they won't convert any better than they normally would. So, that helps you change your marketing spend. It helps you understand the decision points of power users versus non-power users. The insight is instrumenting properties into an event so that you can segment who is doing what behavior and make some hypotheses on that observation. Test that hypothesis, and then you get some causal representation of whether or not that hypothesis was right.

Lenny (00:44:10):
So it sounds like a lot of the root of the issue is setting up the wrong metrics, the wrong... I guess there's the tracking element of just capturing the right information. And then also just not focusing on insights versus just having a bunch of information.

Crystal Widjaja (00:44:24):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:44:24):
What are signs that you're doing this? Say someone's going to go load up their dashboard and they're like, "Am I failing or not?" What should they be looking for?

Crystal Widjaja (00:44:33):
So I already know if a team is good at instrumentation or not just by looking at the instrumentation spec. The symptom of a bad data tracking approach is you have a ton of rows with a ton of events, but every event has one property or no property being tracked. So an example with Gojek would be when a user lands on the map to select a drop off point, the event would be drop off or map loaded, let's say. And the properties there should be things like how many drivers do they see on the screen? What is the pickup location? What city is it in? What latitude and longitude is it? Is there surge pricing? What is the current minimum fare? Do they have a voucher code?

(00:45:28):
All of these characteristics of the experience and the context that can help you look at hey, when a user only sees two drivers on the screen, they're much less likely to convert than a user who sees five drivers on a screen. Now we can look at in what cities and in what latitude and longitudes do we mostly only see two drivers versus five drivers. Being able to do the second layer approach of the why and not just stop at, "That's weird. When you have two drivers you are less likely to book." But then you never ask why. That drives me crazy. Or the inability to even know that there were only two drivers on the screen. You're missing so much context of the user's experience that you're unable to make assumptions about why the user didn't convert.

Lenny (00:46:15):
I love this. Maybe your course is probably going to be the answer, but for folks that want to figure out how to do this taxonomy and events well, how do they go about doing that?

Crystal Widjaja (00:46:26):
So I think it's important to just go through examples. Yes, every product is different, but everyone has the same signup flow for the most part. So look at the signup flow examples that I have in the blog post or in, I believe Amplitude actually has a pretty good long-winded documentation on this, on how to do a event tracking. But it's really a matter of sitting down and thinking really deeply. If I were to press this button, why would I and why would I not? And am I tracking that in my user properties? So it's really just sitting down and mapping out the experience.

Lenny (00:47:05):
Speaking of Amplitude and other data tools, do you have a default recommended metrics stack for our founders just to start with and maybe a few other things as they evolve?

Crystal Widjaja (00:47:14):
That really depends on how early they are. So if they have a single data warehouse with all of their transactional data, usually I say, you can probably get by with Google Data Studio. It's free usually with whatever you're using. If not Metabase has a great open source free tool. If you have someone who can write SQL or if you have multiple databases, then Metabase is great. If you need in app mobile device event tracking, I usually recommend CleverTap because Mixpanel has unfortunately failed me a lot. And Amplitude doesn't have the CRM components that I would need all in one space.

(00:47:51):
If I am much bigger and I need more analytics juice, maybe Amplitude makes sense on top of this, or something that helps me pipe data into more dashboards and do less ETL for me. Then I would get into Segment. And then once you get into experimentation, obviously I have to shout out to Eppo. I think they've really instrumented a lot of the dashboards that I would've normally had to do in experimentation projects. So I usually look at something like Eppo to just automate the decision making flow.

Lenny (00:48:21):
Awesome. I think we're both small investors in Eppo, big fans, a little bit of bias, but yeah's it's an excellent Airbnb team that built it, so it's cool. Shifting a bit from metrics and data to just growth teams in general, maybe first question is just, how do you recommend companies set up a growth team in the early days and then over time?

Crystal Widjaja (00:48:44):
Yeah. So I can talk about how growth was set up at Gojek as an example, which I think is probably the best practice. So we didn't really know what growth was at that time, but we knew there were obvious gaps to fill. So because we had grown so quickly, the core product team was still making the core product features. As simple as phone number masking. That wasn't a thing yet. You had access to your driver's phone number. It's probably not a great thing. It's probably part of the core functionality and we need to fill that gap. At the same time, growth was still necessary because you had all of these users trying to use a product that aren't quite getting there.

(00:49:25):
So things like figuring out what SMS provider we should use to send the OTP to this user who is signing up from this telco provider. That was a growth objective that isn't necessarily core feature work, but was a gap to fill given the onboarding and SMS success delivery rates. Things like telling the driver if this was a brand new customer, because at this point in time, drivers had taken thousands of rides and they assumed every single customer knew how Gojek worked, when maybe they didn't. And so we knew that the protocol was that a power user would know they would make an order and they would just wait. They would wait somewhere, they would keep an eye out for a driver and then they would get on the motorcycle and go.

(00:50:13):
But for a brand new user, are you supposed to walk to the driver? Are you supposed to find them? It's unclear to this brand new, uneducated new user how to use the product. And so first time user experience could have been a terrible one where they went and walked off and then the driver came to the pickup point and they couldn't find them. So it was all of these small acquisition, adoption and engagement use cases that growth was filling the gap on. And eventually we embedded our growth, I would say product managers at the time, into these teams and they ended up synthesizing what growth was as a full-time role. Eventually becoming PMs who own specific parts of the product stack.

Lenny (00:50:58):
So in your experience, and I hear this a lot, is your first growth person shouldn't just come in and figure out what to work on. You should understand here's where we need growth help, let's find somebody to tackle it, versus come help us figure out what to do to drive growth. Is that how you've seen it?

Crystal Widjaja (00:51:11):
Exactly. I think it's just setting the bar too high to expect someone to come in and model everything. Again, there are physics in place it's very hard to move everything. So it's really about having someone who already has all of this data knows where the biggest gaps are. Doesn't have to start from scratch and figure this out and then just picks some small space to work on that they know is workable.

Lenny (00:51:38):
Do you have strong opinions about growth being integrated? The way that you described where growth PM basically has a cross functional team basically is the PM versus a separate growth team that's off to the side.

Crystal Widjaja (00:51:50):
Yeah. I think it can work as a separate growth team to the side if the company is truly head over heels, tripping on insane product market fit, if there's insane, product market fit and you are really scrambling to do core feature stacks, then maybe a growth team to come and be clean up is fine. We're the cleanup crew. We pick up the pieces that were left behind, we connect the dots. You forgot to plug this in, we'll plug it in for you. But we were a team of lots of stats heavy people. So a lot of my team were statistics graduates. We cared a lot about looking at numbers and odds and probabilities because it really is a numbers game at that scale. You could work on anything and everything would probably do something. But what was the thing that would make the most impact now and unlock us for the future.

Lenny (00:52:44):
I was going to ask you folks to look for when they're hiring an early growth person, is that what you find, just stats, data kind of person?

Crystal Widjaja (00:52:49):
You have to have someone who knows how to run the numbers. If you're looking at ratios of conversion rates, but you don't realize that this ratio is of a much smaller base size, you're going to make the wrong decision. So someone who is intuitively good at statistics, they know how to do sampling appropriately. They know what selection bias is. The worst possible thing is to have a growth person who thinks they are doing the right thing and is measuring things wrong and then focusing on the wrong areas.

Lenny (00:53:24):
Do you find that it's often easier or better to hire a young up and coming person or find someone that's got a bunch of experience for your first growth hire?

Crystal Widjaja (00:53:34):
I would hire someone who is willing to take intro to statistics course. And it doesn't matter if they've had the experience to go wild or not. I think it really is, can they focus on the right opportunity rather than the most flashy thing? And I think both profiles can come under that.

Lenny (00:53:54):
Got it. And then what do you do in a hiring process for someone like this? What kind of things do you suggest founders look for?

Crystal Widjaja (00:54:01):
Yeah. I actually look for that first principle bias. So I'll give people case studies of here's what we see, how do you know that this is true? And then I have them set up an experiment design. I want to see that they are sampling randomly. Not that they're like, "I'm going to build this feature and launch it, and of course it's going to work." I want to see that they're taking a measured deliberate approach to considering why someone might do this or what tools are available. A growth team can go terribly wrong when they just try to onboard a bunch of brand new tools that don't integrate well and it takes six months to integrate fully, and then they get nothing done for six months. Everything in growth is an opportunity cost of time, trade off with what you could have been doing to the product in that time.

(00:54:50):
So we biased towards really quick hacky things. Like in the early days of Gojek growth, I think our first real growth experiment, we were actually still the data team at this time, was to connect a quick Python script to the Twilio API that we had access to. And we SMSd a bunch of drivers through a CSV that we uploaded that said like, "Hey, your acceptance rate is really low. You're not supposed to do that. Please accept all the rides that you are getting." And that actually increased acceptance rates by 2% across the board. And when we looked deeper into that data, it did even more so for brand new drivers. And so we then worked with the data driver onboarding team so that they could better facilitate the onboarding experience for their drivers.

Lenny (00:55:38):
For the interview question that you described, an experiment design question, do you give that as a project where they have time to work on it or is it a live thing?

Crystal Widjaja (00:55:46):
Yes. Yeah. I don't think live works really well for these case studies. I want to see people put in the time and the work to do something to the best of their ability. And of course we ask them like, "Hey, you have five days. We expect you to spend probably four hours on this, so if you don't have four hours within these five days, let us know." So we're pretty careful about giving them the appropriate amount of time to do it at the level of quality that we would've expected if they were to work here full-time. So give them those four hours, we want to see do they Google. If they can't figure it out right now, let's see them Google it. We'll ask them what approaches they took, how did they figure this out. And we like to hear people say that they literally had to Google this and read a bunch of white papers. I do that as well.

Lenny (00:56:39):
For people trying to design one of these for themselves, do you have a question that you've retired that you could share or something that would help somebody design their own prompt?

Crystal Widjaja (00:56:49):
Yeah. I can give you a template after this call.

Lenny (00:56:51):
Amazing. We'll include that in the show notes. Easy peasy. Amazing. Okay. A last topic that I wanted to cover is a very cool thing that you were involved in. It's a nonprofit that you started called Generation Girl. And I think the mission is to help women and young girls get into STEM. So I'd love to hear about this program, how you got into it, what it's all about, and then also just how listeners can help support what you're doing.

Crystal Widjaja (00:57:15):
Absolutely. Yes. Generation Girl is very near and dear to my heart. So I co-founded this with a couple of amazing women who were also at Gojek, but are now full-time at Generation Girl. So this really stemmed from us repeatedly getting annoying comments about working in STEM. So things like, "You can't possibly be the engineer on this project. You look like you like makeup and stuff." And we were like, "Yes, I absolutely love makeup, but I also am badass at writing SWIFT code, so step aside." So having experienced a lot of the misrepresentation of what an engineer should look like or should like, I think we really look to Legally Blonde, is one of my favorite movies that represents you can take the powers that you have, whether you like engineering or design or data, and you can be whoever you want and still kick ass at it.

(00:58:14):
So a lot of the women that we support, we're actually happy if they go into one of our classes and they say, "Actually, I don't like engineering." That's great. That's agency and empowerment that they got to make that decision for themselves without any cultural biases or social pressure telling them that they should feel this way. And so we offer free classes for girls 12 to 17. We have college classes. We partner with teachers about how to teach STEM topics, especially in areas where they don't have laptops for every student. How do you teach how to use Figma and things like that? So people can definitely support us and reach out to us. We have a PayPal on our website, take a look.

Lenny (00:58:59):
Can you share some of the impact that you've seen from this? Are there numbers you can share or anything that you can share around what the organizations have done.

Crystal Widjaja (00:59:05):
So we've already had several thousand students go through Generation Girl, summer clubs and programs and classes. So we have an event every week. We have a full summer club that's every single day for two weeks, every summer and every winter. We have partnerships with some of the biggest tech companies in Indonesia, where we partner students with engineers and they work on projects together. And most recently we're part of the MIT solve program with our new initiative Class. So Class, we're creating a free to use site for teachers.

(00:59:40):
So right now we have partnered with a handful of universities in Indonesia, both in rural and city of Jakarta where teachers can now have the knowledge and material to explain newer concepts that maybe they're less familiar with, because startup world changes rapidly, how you develop changes rapidly. So this is one thing that we are most excited about because every teacher impacts thousands of students a year. And being able to teach the teachers and give them the resources that they need is something that's really important.

Lenny (01:00:11):
That's incredible. It's currently just in Southeast Asia, is that right?

Crystal Widjaja (01:00:15):
Only in Indonesia, because frankly, this is where everyone needs the most support. Globally STEM is not well received or welcoming at all to women. I think it's gotten worse over the past few decades. Below 18% of college graduates are women in computer science. So we're really trying to reach the youngest generation because that's when you are told or informed that computer science is for specific types of people.

Lenny (01:00:46):
It's really sad to hear that it's heading in the wrong direction. What do you think is contributing to that?

Crystal Widjaja (01:00:52):
I think there is still a lot of this mental model of what a computer scientist is able to do and how much support they're given. So it's been shown in studies that at the youngest generation middle school, high school, you are more likely to be given introductory STEM classes as a male than as a female. So women just aren't targeted for STEM at that younger age. And so when they enter the high school or college classes for computer science, they're way behind. And that does not feel good. No one likes to be the worst in the class. And so it's more likely that you'll drop out. We've seen studies at Carnegie Mellon that actually would create introductory computer science classes before the college class starts. And for the women who did join those classes, they actually graduated at similar rates as their male counterparts. So it's really setting them up for success.

Lenny (01:01:52):
If folks want to help. You said that there's a PayPal page. Is there any other sort of action people can take?

Crystal Widjaja (01:01:58):
Yes. Enterprise software. We love to teach iOS development, licensed software. We have hundreds of students a year, so let us know.

Lenny (01:02:07):
Awesome. And they can reach you on generationgirl.com?

Crystal Widjaja (01:02:10):
Generationgirl.org.

Lenny (01:02:12):
Crystal, thank you so much for being here. I've taken enough of your time. Two last quick questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out? And then other than the Generation Girl chat we just had, is there any other way folks can be helpful to you?

Crystal Widjaja (01:02:25):
Yes. Please find me at crystalwidjaja.com. You can reach out to me and my email is there. Listeners, please do instrumentation correctly. Please don't track your KPIs. Please track your user journeys and experiences. We'll have much funner things to talk about if you do that.

Lenny (01:02:43):
Amazing PSA. Thank you so much, Crystal.

Crystal Widjaja (01:02:46):
Thanks Lenny. This was a blast.

Lenny (01:02:48):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Ebi Atawodi (00:00:00):
I do not believe in being liked. I believe in being loved, right? And that's a very, very different thing. When I said this once in a meeting, people were like... Yes, right? But it took me a while in reading a lot of books to come to a definition of love and love is the choice to extend yourself for the spiritual growth of oneself or another, right? It's very big, lofty and whatever, but you're literally extending yourself for somebody else or yourself, self-love, right? And that's love. And when you are extending yourself, you're not nice. It's not always nice or like, it sometimes is having hard conversations. It's knowing that, oh, there's a human, they know I care about them. So when the feedback is coming like raw, they know that it's in their best interest because I've shown enough times that I genuinely care about the person behind the role.

Lenny (00:01:00):
Today my guest is Ebi Atawodi. AB is director of product management at YouTube overseeing the creator experience. Previously, she was director of product management at Netflix and head of product for Uber Wallet, checkout, pay, and financial Products at Uber. Ebi shares the most tactical advice I've ever heard on how to develop a vision for your product, along with a bunch of very concrete ways to communicate your vision to your teammates and to executives. We also dig into the craft of product management and how to get better at it. Along with what Ebi's learned about creating a strong product culture on your team and across the company. Ebi is such a wonderful human and clearly an amazing product leader, and I'm excited for you to get to learn from her. With that, I bring you Ebi Atawodi after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:48):
This episode is brought to you by sidebar. Are you looking to land your next big career move or start your own thing? One of the most effective ways to create a big leap in your career and something that worked really well for me a few years ago is to create a personal board of directors, a trusted peer group where you can discuss challenges you're having, get career advice, and just kind of gut check how you're thinking about your work, your career, and your life. This has been a big trajectory changer for me, but it's hard to build this trusted group. With sidebar, senior leaders are matched with highly vetted, private, supportive peer groups to lean on for unbiased opinions, diverse perspectives, and raw feedback. Everyone has their own zone of genius, so together we're better prepared to navigate professional pitfalls leading to more responsibility, faster promotions, and bigger impact. Guided by world-class programming and facilitation Sidebar enables you to get focused tactical feedback at every step of your journey. If you're a listener of this podcast, you're likely already driven and committed to growth. A Sidebar personal board of directors is the missing piece to catalyze that journey. Why spend a decade finding your people when you can meet them at Sidebar today, jump the growing wait list of thousands of leaders from top tech companies by visiting sidebar.com/lenny to learn more. That's sidebar.com/lenny.

(00:03:09):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes the day-to-day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates, and you're spending your days basically putting out fires. A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and road mapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian. With Jira product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place and prioritize confidently. Finally, replacing those endless spreadsheets, create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds. And it's all built on Jira where your engineering team's already working. So true collaboration is finally possible. Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers, sales, support, leadership, even Greg from finance. Anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free, no catch. And it's only $10 a month for you. Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over. Rediscover what's possible with Jira Product Discovery. Try it for free at atlassian.com/lenny. That's atlassian.com/lenny. Ebi, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Ebi Atawodi (00:04:35):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny (00:04:36):
It's my pleasure. First, I just want to give a big thank you to Andre Albuquerque, who is the founder of One Month PM, who actually posted on LinkedIn about how much of a fan of yours he is and that I need to have you on this podcast. And so here we are. I want to start by talking about vision. Every product manager I've ever worked with and managed vision has always been this development area for every single one. It's always this like, "You need to get better at crafting a vision, telling your story." It's also this very powerful tool. The product managers have to align teams to be more successful in the products they're building. And you have a really neat way of thinking about a framework for developing a vision and then telling the story. What are elements of a good vision for a product or even a company?

Ebi Atawodi (00:05:22):
I think the first piece is that you absolutely need to have one, to start by saying that. Regardless of what level you are in the company. So people say, "Oh, I'm just a junior PM." Whatever level, there is some micro macro vision that you need to have. Because essentially if you got on a plane and the pilot was like, "I don't really know where we're going, but I'm a really good pilot. The company needs to fly 400 flights this year. So I'm trying to make that happen, but trust me, we'll get there. There might be turbulence, I'm not sure." You probably would be thinking twice about staying on that flight, right? What happens is you get on there, it's like, "Our destination is Miami." Maybe I'm dreaming of beaches, "And it's going to be 24 degrees when we get there." And he always paints or she paints this image of the destination.

(00:06:13):
And that's the vision not to be confused with the mission, which is we want to fly people where they're going safe. That's not... It's like a picture. So that's the start. I want to just delineate between vision and everything else that people think vision is. So really I think there are a couple of key elements. The first one is it needs to be lofty. So it needs to be something that feels... It almost scares you in an exciting way, right? Like, oh, my God, this is something I can get up every morning. And if we did that, goddamn. But at the same time, it needs to be realistic and attainable, so it cannot feel so pie in the sky that it feels so out of reach, right? And of course, there are leaders and people who have really, really big visions and they see beyond the rest of us, but that's not most people. Most people, it needs to feel within reach.

(00:07:05):
And then I think the key thing is it needs to kind of be in a vacuum from the limitations of today because the whole point of going to the future and saying, [inaudible 00:07:15] time traveled five years out is to say, "Okay, I've come back to tell you what we need to fix in order to get there. Or I've come back to tell you what we need to put in place now so that we will get there, right?" And so you have this kind of three components and if those come together and they are grounded of course, in a problem that people are excited about, you've got your vision. And how that vision manifests really depends on what you want to do. There're simple ones you can do, they're big ones you can do. But those are the core pieces in my mind.

Lenny (00:07:46):
Can you just summarize them again and are some examples you can share if here's a really good vision that it hits on these, and then if you have another example of a bad vision, that would be really helpful?

Ebi Atawodi (00:07:57):
So four things. So it has to be lofty, it has to be realistic, it has to be devoid of any tech or limitations of today, and it has to be grounded in a very clear and potent problem. User problem.

Lenny (00:08:16):
Awesome. And then, yeah, are there any examples either from places you've worked or visions?

Ebi Atawodi (00:08:20):
Absolutely. What I particularly love, so a lot of my product thinking and my product chops and craft, I really owe to Uber. So when I think about things, there's something really magical there. And one of our values at the time was making magic. So I met the word magic all the time, but so mission, push a button, get a ride, transportation as reliable as running water. I used to be in Nigeria, that tagline did not scale because water was not that reliable in Nigeria. So they went for a slightly more inclusive version, which is reliable transport, sanitation everywhere and for everyone, right? So that's the mission. That doesn't really tell me what the image looks like when I get there, but that's like when I wake up every day, I'm like, "Why do I work in this company?" It's that make transportation reliable everywhere for everyone.

(00:09:12):
And I'll talk maybe later about how that came to... We were able to use that to actually challenge the then CEO Travis Kalanick. The vision was a world where you get to this continuous trip so that you do not need parking. Because cities, 25% of the average city is parking spaces. You're in San Francisco, you'll see buildings, just floors just for parking, right? You'll have basements just for parking. In a world where we have housing problems, we have ridiculous prices for rents. Just imagine if you could free up all of those spaces for all kinds of things, right? Homes, restaurants, you name it. Parties, warehouse parties especially, they have the best. That was the vision. You could kind of see it, right? You're like, "Oh, I could see a world." I mean, I live in Amsterdam, I have a bicycle, I can see it every other day. They're getting rid of cars and actually converting the parking lots on the street into communal gardens, right?

(00:10:16):
So it's not crazy. It's attainable. But now doing that for the whole world, what does that look like? And that's how things like Uber Pool came in where in a world where the average car has 1.5 people in it, we can maximize that and then we can get this connected trip where the car is just moving and then maybe the car is autonomous, so you don't actually have to drive that car, and so it just doesn't need to stop. I guess, it needs to charge at some point. But so that's it. I think that's a really good vision. I think one that's lofty and I dance between whether it's attainable or not, is Elon Musk saying, "We're going to get to Mars." He believes it. He believes it so much that sometimes I'm like, "I guess, we're going to Mars." But then there was the other one of, oh, we want a car that's electric and we want that car to be beautiful so that we will get to a car that's accessible to everyone. And that's kind of followed through. So yeah, I mean, the beautiful things about visions is that it helps you decide it. Is that a work... Do I care about this problem? Is it something I want to do? And then you can take it or leave it.

Lenny (00:11:22):
I think with the lofty slash attainable balance, I think that Elon Musk is an interesting example where it may feel impossible, but as an inspirational leader, you almost convince people that it is possible through your confidence and your being in the details, helping people see maybe there's a path. So I think there's an interesting opportunity there to be a leader.

Ebi Atawodi (00:11:42):
Yeah. Absolutely.

Lenny (00:11:44):
You've mentioned this kind of difference between mission and vision a couple of times. It'd be cool maybe just to... Can you summarize that again, just like what is the difference between vision and mission in your mind?

Ebi Atawodi (00:11:53):
I'll use it an analogy. Let's say we want to go hike. We want to go up to Mount Everest. The vision would be once we're up there, me describing the picture of what we're going to see, we're going to get there, we're going to look around, we'll be the Himalayas, be beautiful, we'll be above the clouds, probably out of breath. That's the vision. It's like I fast-forward into the future, I hold time and I'm in that place and I'm describing the picture, right? And so a city without parking, you can see that, right? And we've all watched sci-fi movies. You can see Mars, Red Planet. So that's the vision and then the mission is the purpose of why we're doing that. We're going to do this to demonstrate that we're able to do it and making sure that we both get there together. It's a very simplistic one, but I'm just giving... That's the purpose.

(00:12:46):
We're doing it because we want to prove to ourselves that we can summit Mount Everest, which I will not be doing anytime soon, and we're doing it to prove to ourselves something that we can do it and we're capable, and we will do that by making sure that we look out for each other. Because you can get to Mount Everest and not have all the people with you, right? That's a team bonding challenge that I've done once upon a time. It's actually very, very, very intricate and interesting. So that's your vision. And then the mission is the purpose and some set of guiding principles as to what will allow you to achieve that vision.

Lenny (00:13:23):
That's really handy. So simple way to think about... I'm just taking notes as you're talking and I totally agree with this. The mission is essentially the why and why you exist and the purpose for your team slash company and the vision... The word vision almost tells you what it is. It's what it looks like when you get there. Awesome. So that's exactly how I think about it actually. I have this post that I'll link to in the show notes that talks through mission and vision strategy. I'll give a bunch more examples real quick. Just again, I pulled it up as you're chatting just for folks to have more examples. So a couple of mission examples real quick.

(00:13:55):
At Ted, their mission is to spread ideas. They're around to spread ideas. Stripe's mission increased the GDP of the internet. IKEA's mission created better everyday life for the many people. So I think that's exactly what you're talking about. They're like the purpose, why do we exist? And then visions. So Microsoft's vision, a computer on every desk and in every home. Very much like what does it look like when we've achieved it? Tesla create the most compelling car company of the 21st century. It's kind of in between, but I think that's close. Lyft, a world where cities feel small again, where transportation and tech bring people together instead of a apart. How sweet.

Ebi Atawodi (00:14:31):
So that's one where it's very warm and fuzzy and I love it. Maybe this is my Uber, but you can see a computer on every desk. That's what I mean by it has to be realistic.

Lenny (00:14:44):
Yeah.

Ebi Atawodi (00:14:44):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:14:45):
Yeah. Awesome. So what is a vision concretely as a document in your experience? So we've talked about vision so far, mostly as this tagline, like a sentence, is that usually all you need when you're thinking about a vision, your experience? Do you often suggest going further into dock-deck, storyboards along those lines?

Ebi Atawodi (00:15:07):
So I have a very simplistic framework. I actually don't know who put it together at Uber, but I see as well, one of the most powerful skills of a product manager is storytelling, right? Because you look at generation after generation after generation, what people pass on as stories, they're not numbers, they're not stats, it's stories. And actually when you blend stories with numbers, so if you do numbers alone or numbers with stories or stories alone, the gap is so wide in stories alone. So it's not metrics blended with stories. It's a story, just a pure story. This doesn't mean don't be analytical. So one of the very simplistic tools that I've used, and I use it as well right now at Google, when my team ships the product, I'll put the vision in there to remind what the vision was that they set out to do, right?

(00:15:59):
And it's once upon a time, write the problem and then write something and then write something, and then one day something happened. And as a result, the state of the world where we're trying to be. It's very simplistic, but in its simplicity of the magic because you are like, "I'm a PM, I'm trying to solve problems." Once upon a time, where were we? Right? It's like what is the thing that we're trying to solve? So I'll give you a simplistic one. I know the team didn't do this for shorts, but the shorts team at YouTube. Once upon a time, YouTube was fun and people had cat videos and zoo and all of that. And then one day it became this really polished thing and a lot of people were producing really polished, very one hour content. And then because of that, a lot of people felt maybe I couldn't create because I can't tell a one-hour story.

(00:16:57):
And because of that, people decided, okay, I'm just going to watch and consume and not create. And then one day, we launch shorts, 60 seconds, and because of that, anyone can now express themselves again and bring back the joy and magic of YouTube. So it's very simplistic. I'm just using that into the teams who built this. I know this is not your vision, I'm just giving it a story. But I remember this when we did it for Uber as well, we were talking about the loyalty for drivers and some would have this framework and I thought, holy cow, this is it. So that's a very simplistic version. You can go one step up. The one I like to do, and I know that Amazon does this a lot, but as I write... I write an article. I'll write in the headline because if the vision has come to pass, right? And it's gone well, someone's going to be writing hopefully some sexy headline about the thing that you've built.

(00:17:54):
So I go to the future and I write the headline I would see. And I write the subtitle, just that, and I'll actually use the... I'll [inaudible 00:18:01] it into the page of TechCrunch or [inaudible 00:18:04] or something just so it looks realistic. And I'll put that in the deck just to kind of like, this is where we want to be. And then if I really want to go deep, then I'll write the rest of the article, right? So that's a very simplistic one. Let's stick another version. One that I used, and I show that in a lot of my talks is, I was trying to tell a story when I was at Uber and I was like, "Okay, words are amazing, but a picture tells a thousand words, right?" So I wrote out the thing and I worked with my design partner at the time, and he literally took out a pencil and drew the future.

(00:18:37):
And the vision I was trying to show was this world where you could walk into any store, any Bodega, mom-and-pop shop, wherever you are in the world, and actually top up your Uber balance, right? So even if you don't have a credit card and you have cash, you can also experience this cashless, seamless Uber experience and that can scale all over the world. And he literally drew a Bodega or does it look like a kiosk, like the ones in Nigeria in my country, you have like a [inaudible 00:19:06]. And then he drew that and you had the person with cash and a receipt just showing your top-up was successful. And we built that product. Not exactly in that way, but we built that product. Sorry, for another day or maybe for later, but that's the story. It took four years to build it, but that image got people so excited about, oh, it's possible. I can see that.

Lenny (00:19:29):
This is awesome. So essentially these are three ways to communicate your vision. The first is this kind of Mad Libs approach, which is really simple. So the framework and is there something we can link people to you that where you talk further, kind of have this template? Okay, cool. Okay, cool. So in the show notes, you'll find a little template that you can plug and play here, but the idea is once upon a time, blank and then blank. And because of that blank and one day something happened, and that's essentially the vision is like what happened, the big change that you're going to create.

Ebi Atawodi (00:20:00):
And then as a result of the thing that happened, how did you leave people feeling? What did you change in the world? What's the dent in the universe that you made?

Lenny (00:20:09):
Can you just share this Mad Libs real quick again, just like what's the framework real quick?

Ebi Atawodi (00:20:14):
Once upon a time, the thing that happened, then one day... And you can actually put the date in 2026. And because of that and because of that... And I usually like to end it with, and finally, this was the last thing you left the world with.

Lenny (00:20:36):
Beautiful. It's interesting, it kind of follows the hero's journey a little bit where it's like, here's today's world and then here's a problem that you ran into and this challenge you had to overcome. And then here's how we've defeated the foe. And then here we are back in our default world again. Okay, so that's one path. The other path is to write, working backwards approach, write an article. I think the press release is... To me, it's dumb to write a press release. No one reads press releases anymore. So I like that you think of it as a TechCrunch article.

Ebi Atawodi (00:21:03):
Yes.

Lenny (00:21:04):
Is there something you remember where you did that actually with a product? Like you wrote an article of a product you were launching?

Ebi Atawodi (00:21:08):
At Uber, we were talking about cars, then it was like, well push a button, get a ride. It could be push a button, go anywhere. And so, one of the things I started talking about... And this was the beauty of Uber, it allowed you kind of challenge the status quo. I started pushing this idea of if we need to have this more multimodal trip where I could take a... Ride a bicycle or a scooter, then I get to the train station, buy my ticket, scan in. Then from there I go into an Uber maybe then I come out and the other end and I get a scooter, whatever that is. It's this connected single trip. And the reason I was doing that was I was a Platform PM and surprise surprise, I always say Platform PMs, you have to be an order of magnitude even more stronger I think at vision setting because you have to build the foundations of stuff you don't even know is coming.

(00:22:03):
So I would do these exercises with my partner teams to figure out, even if they don't know it, force a vision out of them just to say, "Is this where we are going?" Because then as somebody building the commerce infrastructure for Uber, I need to know when I need to build if that is a scenario that's actually going to happen. And we were also thinking about this world where you could tap to pay with your Uber phone. So there were all these crazy ideas and I wrote a headline of Uber really wants to replace your... I put it as your clipper card in San Francisco. Because I wanted my San Francisco buddies to relate to what I was saying. So I was like, "Uber is now replacing your Clipper card. All you need is your phone and the app." And I wrote it out and we didn't go and build that product, but we built the payments and commerce infrastructure for the team that did. And we were very involved at the beginning when it was getting kicked off of how does this look in a world where you can use your Uber to pay for transport? You can do that today. So yeah, that's a real life example.

Lenny (00:23:05):
And that was an article that you ended up writing of what the announcement would look like or is that using this? Okay, awesome.

Ebi Atawodi (00:23:11):
It was the article framework. So it was truly the New York Times headline. Even had their logo and then I had the subtitle and later on over time I wrote the actual article, the whole thing. But I started first with that just to kind of provoke a response.

Lenny (00:23:29):
And what did you see as the impact of having that? What kind of benefits did you see having this article that you could pass around? Do you have any memories of like, wow, that was really helpful here?

Ebi Atawodi (00:23:37):
It's two things. So you'll hear me say product management is clarity and conviction. And in writing the headline, you have to focus. Headline is not like... It's not a PRD, right? It's a headline. So when I've done this, what is the impact of this going to be? What's the feeling [inaudible 00:23:56] people with? And it forces you to get to that clarity of, okay, we solved this problem. This is actually going to be the painkiller that we're solving. And then they translate that pain dealer into, they have a headache, they no longer have a headache. Do you know what I mean? So I think it breaks clarity. So for me, as the PM I'm like, this is why I'm saying this is important. Then you have the subtitled. So they'll usually have the headline and I'm like, sub bit. They've just launched a way to something something, and you have to write that as well.

(00:24:22):
What is the thing we're launching and is that realistic? And then using that to kind of socialize the idea to say, "This actually could work, right?" And I didn't go off and build it. Somebody else went and did it, but we had already thought about it and bit that into our platform vision of we need to be able to support these different kinds of ways to pay. There's another interesting one that you're going to go to. The third one, which is write the story. Write the article that someone else will write or visualize it, right? And the visualize it, two things actually happened. One a year and a half ago, in a strategy session I was running at YouTube, i...

Ebi Atawodi (00:25:00):
The strategy session I was running at YouTube, I actually took a screenshot of the Google Play Store. I mean, I use an iPhone, but I worked at Google, so I was trying to be... So I took the Google Play Store and then I created rounded rectangles, just blank rectangles, four panels. And then I printed that out and I gave everyone a sheet and I said, "If we solve these problems, we solve all these problems that we've identified, what would be the screenshots?"

(00:25:32):
You know when you go on the app store, it has the make money or express yourself, what are we trying to say and what is the mock, the hero mock, the marquee mock that we're showing? And then again, it forces people to, oh goodness, we can't show everything, so it's got to be three or four things that land the big rocks that will solve this problem. Right? So everyone did theirs and then we talked about it and what was interesting is you'll find two or three that everyone comes up with if you've done a good job of telling a story around the problems. And it actually quite beautiful to see. So that's a very simplistic visualization that's not like a beautiful sketch or video.

Lenny (00:26:12):
I really like that as just a reminder that when you're even the article approach of announcing the thing instead of the traditional press release or even a Tech Wrench article, it's where will people find out about the thing you've built, and then use that as a way to frame what you've done. So in your case, it's like the app store. They're going to see this update in the app store. Let's just see what that would look like as we announce it in the app store. Could end up being a tweet, could end up being podcasts. There's all these different channels. So I think that gives people more ways of telling the story. If it's not going to be a press release.

(00:26:41):
Then yeah, so you talked about this third approach of mocking up essentially the vision. I always feel like if you have a designer helping you craft your vision, it's such a unfair advantage. So definitely try to a rope a designer in to help you tell a story.

Ebi Atawodi (00:26:41):
Absolutely.

Lenny (00:26:56):
Because just one design is going to, like you said, worth a thousand words, as they say.

Ebi Atawodi (00:27:02):
The thing though is I feel like it's an easy cop out to be like, "Oh, but my design team doesn't have resources." So I'm like, "No, that's not an excuse. Start drawing it with your hands in the app store." Still tell the story because the story, you should be able to tell this. I'm obsessed with Steve Jobs. He would say, "Tell the story without slides." Right? So that mocking it up is just so you can actually bring that narrative and tell that story. And do an app store or sketch it out or use little rectangles to show low fidelity mocks. Do not use, I don't have a designer, to be the excuse for why you don't bring it to life.

Lenny (00:27:44):
And often the designer sees it and like, "This sucks. I'm going to make it better."

Ebi Atawodi (00:27:47):
Exactly. So that's exactly what I did. I sketched this thing once and I gave it to a designer. It was literally post-it notes and they were like, "Okay, I see where you're going and it's exciting. I have some cycles, I'll spin it up." They spun up a lo-fi one, loved it, and I'm like, "Actually, I'm just going to make it pretty." Then they made it pretty and we got there. I mean now I'm a director, so I have a bit more agency with resources, but I was like a L-four PM, not even a senior PM when I did my first vision exercise.

Lenny (00:28:16):
Okay, this is awesome because I think it's really vague, this idea of I need to develop a vision, and I think you've shared some incredibly tactical clear steps you can take. I also want to talk about how to actually develop the vision. I think you have kind of this step-by-step approach. Is that right?

Ebi Atawodi (00:28:31):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:28:31):
Okay, awesome. So before we get to that, just again reminding people what we just talked about, which is just like here's all these ways of framing your vision, and there's a lot of ways to do it. It's not like you need to make a beautiful deck that you can just write it out. You could write a press release, you could write a tweet or you could get a designer help you mock it up or just mock it up yourself. Awesome. Okay, so let's talk about your suggestions of how to actually go about developing and figuring out the vision for your product.

Ebi Atawodi (00:28:59):
Yeah. There are three pieces if you think about it. So one is what I call empathize. The second is create. So we spend a lot of time talking about create, the middle piece. Another's evangelize. And so I empathize with the customer, the problem. I put myself in their shoes. I really get a visual understanding of what those problems are. I'll talk about it in a second the tactical way I have done that across Uber, Netflix, and Google in a way that scales. Then the create piece where it's okay, now we've solved this problem. What does the world look like? That's the vision we've just been talking about. And then finally, evangelize.

(00:29:36):
So I find just especially as you get more senior, the life cycle of a product or a group of products gets wider and wider and wider. And so I set out a vision, for example at YouTube last year that was called Vision 2026. And only this year, a year and a half later, are we now at a stage where it's actually going into the planning cycle. We've actually finished all the things were already in progress. We're actually now funding some of the big rocks that get us there.

(00:30:08):
So there's a bit of patience that comes with it. And I think some people just give up when they get to the stage because you're going to meet a lot of naysayers. That one person's like, "But there's no way the engineering is ever going to solve." There's always going to be those people which is why I said you need to come up with a vision that's in a vacuum of the technical limitations because the limitations of today might not be the limitations of tomorrow.

(00:30:32):
So going back to the empathize, one of my peers at work uses this word, he says, "You need to do understand work." And what is understand work? It's crazy to me the number of PMs who never go through their products and go through the... unless of course you're the onboarding PM, but actually go through the onboarding flow. Because we're all in this state of using the product. But actually, that first step where I don't have the product, what does that look like? I have multiple variations of accounts on YouTube. I have multiple accounts on Instagram. I have multiple accounts on Tiktok where I'm just using the product just like how does it manifest? What do I like? What's going well? I had this thing with Uber. I had Uber, I had other partner apps, I would look at them and payment services, empathize comes very easily if you dog food and then cat food. Dog food, meaning using your own product, absolutely a must. Cat food using your competitors or other people in the landscape's products.

(00:31:36):
So that's one piece. The other piece is obviously research, but research is an interesting one because I think you use research. I think research is rich when it's giving you foundational problems that are a couple of cycles out, obviously depending on the level of research you're doing. But your researcher, if you think about the product cycle, research is ahead, and then UX, and then you go into building, it's like in that phase.

(00:32:06):
And so I find too many people lean into and, "Let's go test it, let's go do some research." It's like, dude, you're a human. Look at the products. Would you use that? You built some intuition from just exposing yourself to really good products. Every time you pick up your phone, what is it about the apps that you love? Do you think about that? Oh, I open up my phone. I love Spotify. I also love YouTube Music, but I really love Spotify for my music. I've used it for years and I'm like, okay, what is it about this new thing that just rolled that I love? And I try to articulate that.

(00:32:44):
So there's that piece, but then the tactical thing that I almost make every PM on my team do I call it top 10 things you should know. It's a living document. So in my org right now I've got quite a number of PMs and for each of those PMs in this living Google Doc, it's like go slash studio problems, they literally put 10 things, like 10 problems you should know. And you revise it. Every quarter you update it and they're separate. So it's like a living set of problems. And they could be qualitative, they could be quantitative, they could be tech debt. They should be tech debt.

Lenny (00:33:27):
These are just known problems with the product that everyone was aware of?

Ebi Atawodi (00:33:27):
Correct.

Lenny (00:33:31):
Okay. Awesome.

Ebi Atawodi (00:33:33):
You kind of farm for the problems. So you keep that doc going. And so I first started this at Uber on the money team and I called it money problems, more money, more problems because I do fundamentally believe we should bring joy into everything we try to do, so have fun with it. So more money, more problems. And essentially, it was in partnership with my data scientist partners that he had a team of product analysts and data scientists and they would pair up with my PMs and we would have the UX team, the UXR team, the data team, and the product managers, and engineering get together and actually look at their problems.

(00:34:09):
So that living document means that for me, if I go around at least my minus one, not just for me but my engineering partner's minus ones, and my design partner's minus ones, and we chat them and say, "What are the top five problems for studio?" They should all have the same answer. This says I've done my job because then we all know the problems. You can debate them. You can discuss them. You can have sessions where you revise and review them. But we do that and then we go into a room and for example at Uber, I literally printed them on cards and I put them on tables, scattered the groups and had people discuss and vote the ones that is the most painful because then you see the whole thing.

(00:34:52):
So that's the empathize bit. I'm spending a lot of time on this because I can't tell you how many times the clarity of the problem, going back to clarity and conviction, is missing and that problem is kind of like the North star. Everything's going on, but there's a north star that doesn't move.

Lenny (00:35:10):
Before you move on, there's so much there I just want to touch on that are really interesting insights. One is just this point you're making of when you're trying to develop a vision or thinking about the next step, you should be way ahead of that. You have this doc that you've been working on and consistently update and it's there way ahead of time. It's not like cool, next year's coming up, let's start from scratch and figure out what the vision is long-term.

(00:35:32):
Two is there's this quote that I think Patrick Hollison tweeted that I always think about in these discussions where a lot of people think of user research. It's like user research, often people think of user research, you do user research and that tells you what to do. And he made this point, no, it should be user research updates your mental model of your customer and what they need and the problems they're having, the stock that you're writing, and then that mental model informs what to build.

(00:35:57):
And so I think that's a big difference and it connects with what you also said of you should trust your gut and judgment. A lot of people discount as a PM like I should have no opinions. I'm just going to listen to what data and research is telling me. I'm not going to try to bias the team, but something I've learned more and more over time is just you should really trust your gut and your instincts exactly like you said.

Ebi Atawodi (00:36:19):
If I could put all the research into Bard or ChatGPT and it could spit out a PRD, then you haven't done your job. So basically I maybe panicked my team. I came in, I'm like, gen AI, everybody's talking about all the stuff that you do with creating content, but what I want you to think about is what is the value add you bring that I can't just put into an AI right now and say, "Tell me the big thing based on this research that exists."

(00:36:49):
So I've never heard that quote from Patrick Hollison, but I agree. It's spot on. And I think this is where when you think about the qualities of a product manager, I think there are four pillars, product sense, leadership, execution promise, and technical ability. And it's not product logic. It's product sense.. It's a feeling, right? It's a sense of what is right and that the exposure to products and the curiosity will refine that sense over time. And I think that's the thing that people undervalue a lot.

(00:37:25):
It's like you start program managing and just spitting out what engineering said we can't do and UX said they could do and you become this. That's not the job. The job is clarity and bringing this kind of context really to the set of problems that are being solved and you're curing them together. That's the key there. It's like you're curating those problems together.

Lenny (00:37:48):
And one of the challenges I find as a PM is convincing people of your gut instinct of why this is right. But I think that loops back to the power of vision and helping everyone align, like here's why we exist and here's where we're going and here's what I'm sensing is probably an opportunity.

(00:38:04):
Okay, so just to summarize some of the tips you've shared on this empathize step. One is basically user research, but I think even more importantly, use it to inform your understanding of the problem the users are running into and their needs and things like that. What else did you talk about? Oh, use the product. Actually be a user of the product. In your case it'd be like upload YouTube videos. Yeah. Is there anything else? Okay, there's this doc that you shared. That's awesome. So just basically a running document of known problems our users have with our product.

Ebi Atawodi (00:38:38):
Correct. And when you start getting to the strategic lens, so you have a set of problems, what I sometimes will do is especially if you're, for example a platform PM, PMs generally have lots of stakeholders, there'll be a marketing team that's asking for something or an operations team that's like our market needs this. I'll sometimes bring them in at the beginning of the strategy session and give them a template, 10 things you should know. So you use my framework to give me 10 problems. Because if you say, "Come present," they'll do like 50 slides. No, that's just 10 things you should know and stack rank them. So I put the work on you now to give me some color.

(00:39:14):
I hear from marketing, comm, support, research, content strategy. Actually had that in my last strategy session where it was the most mind-blowing 10 things you should know. One of them was like the average reading age of an American is 11 years old. And so you start to think of, oh my god, all the text we have, maybe we should use images or a video or whatever. So bringing this sort multifaceted view of the problems and then you do the work of sandpapering down to the core thing and then you have the final 10.

(00:39:50):
So that would be the tactical if you want to take it to a more strategic lens. That's how I'd run the first day of my strategy session is usually insights. I'll usually do three days, insights, strategy, then big rocks. And the insights piece is this where we go deep into the problems and I use this template of 10 things you should know, and then we come out with the final list of 10 things you should know, like a consolidated list.

Lenny (00:40:14):
I really like this additional tip you just shared of as you're trying to develop a vision for a team is bring in stakeholders and use this framework to help them crystallize here's the most important things to me from the product and things that I think are big opportunities. And then essentially, now you've got buy-in from stakeholders of hey, at least they've heard me and they understand and then here's what they came up with. And then I could be like, "No, but what about this thing?" That at least gives you a way to bring everyone together and understand how the process is going. Okay, so this week of work you just shared, so can you just talk a bit more about this? Is this you leading the team through an exercise to develop a vision and a strategy?

Ebi Atawodi (00:40:54):
Correct. Correct.

Lenny (00:40:56):
Got it. And so you said the first three days are aligning and fully understanding and immersing yourself in insights?

Ebi Atawodi (00:41:02):
I usually have strategy sessions of three days. I've tried to do it in two days. That is the absolute limit because I think you need to create white space for just the magic to happen. But I usually use a framework that it's literally what I call the narrative structure. So when we get into the conviction part, the clarity is the problems to solve. The conviction is the narrative. The framing of that conviction is insights, strategy, big rocks.

(00:41:29):
So the insights day is just focused on understand work, these five problems, actually using the app, doing teardowns of other apps. It's just like a day of understanding. So the Google design, they ask the experts. In a way I've given the experts a template, that's what I'm doing basically. And then the second day is where we now go into the strategy of all the problems we've seen, the 10, which are the ones we want to focus on in which order?

Lenny (00:41:58):
And who's in these meetings?

Ebi Atawodi (00:42:02):
I always have four folks. So it would be depending on the level of the strategy, it usually be product, my engineering partner, my design partner, and research.

Lenny (00:42:14):
Got it. So it's the leaders of the team.

Ebi Atawodi (00:42:16):
The leaders of the team. And depending on the org, I'll bring in data science because at Google we have a more shared data science resource. So I'll usually invite them as one of the partners. Come tell 10 things you should know. So they'll say, "We need to do more instrumentation," or whatever.

(00:42:31):
But you hit on the fantastic point which I was going to connect later, which is when you get to the evangelized stage, humans love to know you heard them. So imagine it's like you did all the work of bringing them together to say, "Hey, tell me 10 things." You've asked the questions, you've come back and said, "Here's the strategy that we're going to focus on and here's the vision." And that last stage where you evangelize becomes so much easier because it's like how did you arrive at this vision? That goes away or like, but you guys didn't solve in that. It's like we heard you and then we parse them into these 10 and everybody agreed with these 10 and therefore that's why we came up with this solution.

Lenny (00:43:11):
So let's segue to the evangelize step, which I think I always talk about. I always think about the Seinfeld meme of when he is trying to get a car reservation where he shows up and they don't have his car and they're like, "We have your reservation, we just don't have your car." And he's like, "That's the most important part of the reservation. You take the reservation, but you don't keep the reservation. That's the most important part." So I think to me it's always like you have this vision, you have amazing roadmap strategy, but if no one even knows it or hears it, that's the most important part. So I think it's super important to understand this. So I'd love to hear your advice on just how to successfully evangelize and share this vision that you've come up with.

Ebi Atawodi (00:43:50):
In terms of evangelizing, I think about three concentric circles. So the core of your vision is your team. And I want to make sure my team understands the vision because I'm basically saying, "Get on this boat, we're sailing to the vision of the Bermuda or some island," and I describe this beautiful island. They kind of have to be bought in and have conviction that they want to get there to actually sail on that boat together.

(00:44:20):
 And so the team is the biggest part and it's the whole team. It's not like just the PMs are the vision. We're just the designers are the vision. I will literally first start with each of the folks that were in the room. We will basically bring our teams together and present an app. So for example, the one we did last year, we presented to what we call studio leads, which are essentially the triads for each of the product team, PM, engineering, and design for each of the product teams, and just presented it out. And I had multiple.

(00:44:50):
We had the first one. Then I had one in my PM weekly, presented it again then, "Hey folks, still any questions?" Because people are still... It's percolating. It's like the tea bag. It's oozing out. They're trying to understand it and they're trying to stress test it. And what I also do is I write the output of the workshop. So I'll always write the output. These are the insights we came out with. Here's the ones upon a time framework. Here's the strategy. Here are the big rocks and a vision is coming.

(00:45:18):
And then we'll do the vision and say, "But this is the vision of where we're going if we do all these things." And that will be a living document, comments, open for comments, no edit, not view only, comments because you want anyone to leave comments in there and just feel they have a say. You don't have to respond to all of them. You don't have to resolve all of them, but just if you put rocks in a washing machine, they polish each other. I like this friction.

(00:45:47):
I always like, I go into the forest, I cut a piece of wood, and our job together is to polish it down to the beautiful danish furniture. So it's okay to have that friction to do that for a bit. And then once the team has kind of gotten to a place, I'm not trying to get anyone to a hundred percent certainty, I'm trying to get you just on the ride. They will come, right?

(00:46:05):
Then I kind of go to this next layer, which is the stakeholders, those people that came in and their teams and their managers go to them and sort of get them brought in to the vision as well. And they'll also bring perspectives, right? You're missing this piece. We have a lot of engineering. Support tickets will blow up if you do this thing. What does that look like? You guys haven't solved the thing we need to do today. You're talking about something five years out.

(00:46:32):
You're going to get all the variations of feedback. That's okay. The core that people have bought into that story. And it's okay to have all the... And then finally, once you've got the feedback from stakeholders, you then go to leadership, and leadership really as high as possible. So when I was at Uber and I was like an L-five, L-six, I had visions going all the way. I mean I had a fantastic leader. He put me on stage at an all hands to present the vision. And we were like one wallet, all Uber experiences. And then we have this vision of a world where Uber Eats, it could be trains, it could be whatever and you have this one Uber wallet that can be used for all of them. And we had mocks of what that looked like.

(00:47:13):
So go as big as possible. Go big. Let people tell you to pull back. Let your manager use lasso and pull you back. Go as much as possible. So I go to leadership and then I have leadership, I have to find that story as much as possible. So those are the three concentric circles. Core team, the people who will actually build this thing, stakeholders, the people that need to be bought in for this thing to be successful because they play a part, and adjacent teams because as we're building this thing, it might mean that we tell you no for one of your requests or something, and then finally leadership. It's hard.

Lenny (00:47:48):
It sounds like a lot of work and a lot of time. Do you do this for yearly planning? Do you do this for future 2026 vision? Do you do this for quarterly plans? What's kind of the scale of vision that you invest this time into?

Ebi Atawodi (00:48:05):
We go back to the four parts of the vision we [inaudible 00:48:10]. If a vision is something that's coming next year, write a newsletter. Write the newsletter, the headline article version or do the mock. When you are really getting into a vision, you're talking about something that almost feels attainable, but realistic, so it's a long-term thing.

(00:48:26):
And so you do the work and you take that time because you know that the rewards when you get everyone rowing in the same direction will mean a lot more velocity. And the ripple, I talked about evangelizing within the company, it's everything. When I start talking to a candidate, I say, "Hey, my team's mission is expression meets connection, our vision is this." Then their eyes are like, you can see the twinkle. And so the ripple effect of this thing is just broad and big. My edge partner was just hiring for a role and in the job description, she opened it first with our team mission. And it was like we have these short links at Google, so it's like Google slash studio vision. People get excited just seeing it. So it's really this evergreen thing that is, we're talking four, five years. It's not the next six months. It's the next six months, do the tweet. Do the tweet.

Lenny (00:49:24):
Okay, awesome. I think that's very clarifying. And so is this something you encourage your PMs to do is just always be working on this vision for the next, say, five years? Invest this time kind of in the background as you're shipping things every day, every quarter, to make sure people understand where it's going long term. And then it's like this one-off exercise that maybe you repeat every year too.

Ebi Atawodi (00:49:45):
I think if you have to repeat the vision every year, you have not created a good vision. You haven't done the work. So I'll give you an example of the one at Uber. What we kept doing was we would bring more fidelity to actually parts of the vision. So we had a low fidelity mark, more higher, and higher. Then at one point-

Ebi Atawodi (00:50:00):
Right. We had a [inaudible 00:50:03] at Ohio. Then at one point we did a sizzle reel and actually had, if this thing is live. But we're not creating multiple visions. Remember all the things you read. A desk on every table. It's not like every year it's changing. Or going to Mars. It's not every year. It's something that it's you literally rinse and repeat. So the vision is something that is evergreen and lasts in my mind at least three years. However, and I'm talking about PMs from L4 all the way to L7 in my team, which is from a junior PM, senior PM all the way to GPMs in my org, all have a variation of a vision. That's a three-year thing. Now when they're going into a micro-visions that's like a macro-vision where maybe they're solving a small problem. Then they'll just do a mock of what that thing looks like next year and then in that mock, they'll present, "This is the mock of what we think it should look like." That is a vision. It's a micro-vision but it is a vision. So do that.

(00:51:04):
And that's the thing they used to say, "Hey, leadership, this is the problem statement. Here's what we think how might we solve this big problem and here's what we think it looks like when we ship it." That's a mini-vision. What I'm talking about is this macro-vision, but you actually can have the micro ones along the way.

Lenny (00:51:24):
Awesome. That is really helpful. By the way, I really like that phrase, "How might we." I find that extremely useful in communicating. Almost a vision, basically, just how might we solve this problem? Just that phrase alone is a really... There's this concept one of the PMs I worked with used called fertile questions. When you ask someone a fertile question that leads to discussion and a really good way to create a fertile question is how might we get more people to engage with YouTube analytics? It leads to lot of good brainstorm ideas. So good micro tip right there that we can include.

(00:51:55):
This episode is brought to you by Wix Studio. Your agency has just landed a dream client and you already have big ideas for the website but do you have the tools to bring your ambitious vision to life? Let me tell you about Wix Studio, the new platform that lets agencies deliver exceptional client sites with maximum efficiency. How? First, let's talk about advanced design capabilities. With Wix Studio, you can build unique layouts with a revolutionary grid experience and watch as elements scale proportionally by default. No-code animations at sparks of delight while adding custom CSS gives total design control. Bring ambitious client projects to life with any industry with a fully integrated suite of business solutions from e-commerce to events, bookings and more. And extend the capabilities even further with hundreds of APIs and integrations. You know what else? The workflows just make sense. There's the built-in AI tools, the on-canvas collaborating, a centralized workspace, the reuse of assets across sites, the seamless client handover, and that's not all. Find out more at Wix.com/Studio.

(00:52:59):
So I want to move on to craft but before we do that, is there anything else that you think would be helpful for folks to leave with in terms of getting better at vision? Say someone's got a development opportunity of get better at vision. Which of these things you've shared do you think would be maybe something they could start working on? Is it craft this five-year vision? Is it pick one of these three ways to communicate it? Is it change the way they're empathizing to inform the vision?

Ebi Atawodi (00:53:28):
I'll give a 1.5. I think it's, number one, it baffles me, and I'm somebody who came into product. I don't have a product management career. I came into product. And I've done that now at Uber and Netflix and Google and it still baffles me the number of people where when I say, "Tell me the top problems that keep you up at night," and then rambling. I'm like, "What are we talking about? Why are we rambling?" This is literally the thing that you come to work. This is the thing that should excite you. So I cannot overemphasize this importance of top 10 things [inaudible 00:54:09] but you don't need to start with 10. I start with 10 and actually I always end up with top three. So in every deck, I'll have three things. Three numbers or four numbers. We just got a new chief product officer at YouTube because Neal Mohan is now the CEO, when I did my presentation to her, the opening sign is four things you should know. With these four numbers and four insights. So she walks away with that information now.

(00:54:36):
So it needs to be visceral and crisp and clear. And then from that, just for yourself, have fun with it. Take out a post-it note and sketch, if you were to solve this problem, what it looks like. Just start there. Right? Just start there. And then if you can at least convince yourself, I don't so much care about the deck. The deck helps, absolutely. Or the pictures in the box. If you can tell the story of this is a problem and this is the world I see, imagine a world, that in itself is already you evangelizing the vision.

Lenny (00:55:11):
Amazing. That is so helpful. So essentially, make this list of the biggest problems that your users have with your product and I think you also include infrastructure, tech, debt issues, maybe internal problems too.

Ebi Atawodi (00:55:22):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:55:22):
Awesome. I just want to know this list for every company now. Just what are their biggest problems? I wonder what they're struggling with.

Ebi Atawodi (00:55:22):
Right?

Lenny (00:55:22):
Okay.

Ebi Atawodi (00:55:30):
By the way, the infrastructure piece, I know it's a nugget on the side but infrastructure is the product. Period. People are like, "Oh, tech debt." I'm like, "Yeah, it's a product debt." I cannot build a skyscraper on a shaky foundation. So it is your problem too. It's not for the engineer to be barging on the door and be like, "Oh, there's a problem." So that's the other one I'll just call out. That in itself is problem as well.

Lenny (00:55:57):
You're speaking to the heart of every engineer listening.

Ebi Atawodi (00:55:59):
I know.

Lenny (00:56:02):
Okay, and then the other tip was sketch the solution. Just do a post-it, draw it out, see how it feels. I think just people don't realize just the power of, "Oh, I have to actually think about what this will look like and not just paint this very fuzzy picture of what it might be." Amazing. I feel like this is the most tactical and practical segment of advice on how to get better at vision. I'm so excited to get this out and for folks to have things that they actually do to get better at vision. I feel like this could be the whole podcast but you have more awesome stuff to share so I want to keep going. We're going to keep you here, extract as much content as we can out of your brain.

(00:56:39):
So you touched on this phrase that you like to use for describing what is the craft of product management, succinctly describing the craft of product management. And I know there's many layers deep in this concept but just to start, what is this phrase and framework you think of to describe what is product management craft? What is the job of PM, basically?

Ebi Atawodi (00:57:00):
So I use, I want to say clarity and conviction. And that's what product management is. You bring clarity and you have conviction. So you find a lot of time, we've just talked about a number of things. All of those things, what they're doing is bringing clarity. And that clarity especially for the problem. So even when, I'll just give you a little tactical thing. I noticed there's some PMs who will send an email and I read the email, I'm like, "What do you want me to do? Is this an FYI? Are you saying there's a problem? Do you want me to help?" So just even something as simple as that. Because as PMs, we're constantly influencing by bringing clarity. So the clarity, all the stuff we just talked about, coming up with a list of problems, really trying to understand what customers care about. All you're doing is bringing clarity so that when you're in a room and someone is going off and doing [inaudible 00:58:07] actually we don't need that research. I feel like we all know that that's a problem. We don't need that research.

(00:58:11):
Instead of doing foundational research, let's do UX validation when the time comes. That's the kind of clarity you can break that saves cycles. So that's the clarity piece. And if you think when you think about what clarity is, you define clarity. It's this transparency. It's the simplicity of understanding. That's what the word is. It's removing all, it's sifting out all the stuff that's polluting the core thing. That's how I think of clarity. And the tactical thing that I use to bring that clarity is the framework I talked about which is the narrative, insights, strategy, big rocks. It brings clarity to why we're doing what we're doing, how we're going to do it and what we're going to do. And I spend time talking and I can spend time talking about all this but we talked about the workshop to do that and I actually have, and one of my old EMs who you've actually had on the podcast talks about this a lot. People have fancy decks. That's great. Clarity comes when you write. So I made them write two-page documents.

(00:59:20):
I'll let you go up to four, maybe. But two page documents with insights, your strategy or I use the word approach sometimes and then the big rocks. And the big rocks are not a laundry list of 20 things because if I asked you to make me a cocktail, you would put ice in first. Then you would pour the drink. You would not put the drink and then put the ice or it will splash and it's messy and that's how an endless roadmap looks to me. So it's like 3, 4, 5 things that anyone can remember that are the biggest things that if we land, this gets us closer to solving the problems. Then every other little thing is around. You can fill that around. That's the sand around the big rocks.

Lenny (00:59:59):
So let's just actually double click on this little framework that you're sharing of insight strategy, the big rocks. This is essentially what you ask your teams to share as their strategy, as their plan, essentially. The high level plan, it's not yet a roadmap strategy. Do you think of this just as vision and strategy as this document?

Ebi Atawodi (01:00:17):
This is not vision. This is not telling us what the world will look like if we solve the problem. That's the vision. This is actually bringing clarity to the narrative of why we exist. So if you were a company, and I always use these, I feel like we can solve a lot of problems in life if we found a parallel in the world. And the parallel I just look for is if this was a startup and you wanted to tell people why you exist and why they should invest in you, which is why you're doing this PM, what is the big problem you solve as a company? What's the strategy and what are the things you're going to deliver that would end up in the headlines that are coming in the future that you need money for? You're telling investors, "I'm going to build these things, I need money to do these things." That's what this is. It's just the narrative.

(01:01:04):
And I think one of the simplest things a PM can have is this narrative that when people come to you and be like, "Hey, you see all these emails, introduction, meet this person." And the PM [inaudible 01:01:16] are like, "Oh, I want to set up a time to understand what you do." I'm like, "Nope. Go to [inaudible 01:01:22] slash my narrative, read it. Then when we set up the time, let me know if you have questions." And guess what? A lot of calls will fall off just from that. Or when someone comes into the team and they're like, "hat are we about?" Onboarding, here's the narrative. So that's the narrative and that's the one that you refresh periodically so that you can refresh every quarter and refresh every six months because you're adjusting to what's happening in the world, what the problems are. That's a narrative.

Lenny (01:01:48):
One last question just so folks get a sense of where this fits into all their work. Does this come before defining the vision and then the roadmap? Where does this fit in terms of vision and roadmap in terms of the process?

Ebi Atawodi (01:02:00):
So the document is evergreen and updated. I'm a big fan of evergreen documents because you create this mental thing where everybody just knows, link whatever the short link is, whatever you use in your company, they remember it and that's the link and that's where I go or they know what the name is to search for the document. It's like how we all know good PM, bad PM. It's lived for the test of time. So I believe in evergreen documents. Update the existing document or do a versioning of the doc, like 2022 version, 2023 version, whatever that is. So typically the narrative will happen before as you go into planning. So just my team right now, we've just gone through a planning cycle. Now I already had a vision for the team, but basically each team, they took the overarching vision and said, "Okay, let's now bring that to life for our area." They had a set of problems, they had their strategy, approach we called it, and then they have the big rocks. And everyone wrote the two pager. So we wrote this two page document.

(01:03:05):
And then they circled around, the partners, the engineering teams and got feedback. And that's what they then used to then build out the roadmap. Then they built out the roadmap and said, "Okay, based on that, this is what the roadmap looks like of unpacking those big rocks a little bit more." And usually what the rule we gave was, if you have less than three engineers on a problem, consolidate. More than three, it needs [inaudible 01:03:30]. So then you have the roadmap, it's just a Google sheet with a list of things and the resources assigned to it, and that's when we start to see, okay, where are you blocked? You have enough UX, you have enough this, it's a bit more tactical. And then you have your roadmap. But then after you've done the inside strategy, the big rocks or the roadmap, you can in parallel or after say, "Okay, let's take a week off. Spend time in a room and shape the vision." Or "Let's take a day off." I've once done one a day, the sketches I talked about. We literally locked ourselves in a room.

(01:04:06):
At Uber, we had no meeting Wednesday. Google and YouTube, we have no meeting Friday. And I said, just block your no meeting Friday. The next one we're going to get in the room, we're going to whiteboard. We literally posted notes and the designer of course was like, "This thing is ugly," and then made a pre. And that was the vision. The vision, I remember seeing so many docs at Uber with literally slides from my doc saying, " We agree with this vision and so therefore we're going to build this thing in our team to support it." And that's great. I feel influencing. And I'm seeing it right now at YouTube as well, where teams are like, "Oh, I've seen that vision," and they'll refer to it. "I saw your studio vision on slide five when you talked about this. This is what we did with it." So that's how I would do it.

Lenny (01:04:53):
Oh man, I feel like there's so many directions I want to go. You have so many nuggets of wisdom but I'm going to get back on track. So you have this framework of what a great PM is, clarity. Let's talk about conviction. What does that actually look like? We

Ebi Atawodi (01:05:05):
Already spoke about conviction. So conviction is the vision.

Lenny (01:05:08):
Mm. Where you basically very succinctly tell here's where we're going and here's why we're doing this.

Ebi Atawodi (01:05:15):
So definition of conviction is a feeling of what you think the way the world should be. It's a feeling. It is not certainty. It is not absolute. It is not perfect. But it's a feeling of, I feel like this is the right thing to do. And that's what we're seeing when we talk about product sense. It's building this feeling of what you think is right so you bring that to life. And so everything we just talked about is literally you converting the conviction from your head into something that people can consume. And that's the conviction, clarity, narrative, vision, conviction.

Lenny (01:05:50):
So this is specifically the craft or product management. If you want to get better at the craft of building great products, these are the two areas I imagine you point your PMs to get clear on things and then have more... Is it more conviction? Is it clear conviction? How do you think about the skill of getting better at conviction?

Ebi Atawodi (01:06:09):
If you have conviction and it's not clear, then you don't have conviction, quite frankly. If you're like, "I think maybe we should, there are five things we should solve." I'm like, "Then you don't have conviction." So I'll sometimes stress test. And I'm like, "What if I took away all your resources and you only had five, which is the one you're going to build?" I do all these Draconian things that just force clarity. So then the conviction will come out and it's like, "Yeah, but I'm uncomfortable." I'm like, "Okay, so the thing that's making your uncomfortable, go spend time, go spend your research, go spend your cycles on getting higher certainty on that conviction," rather than chasing four things because we're, I don't want to use the word lazy, but too scared to pick a lane. So don't peanut butter. Nobody does anything well by peanut buttering resources, spreading them thin. So that's the conviction. I'll sometimes have someone come to me and say, "We have these two scenarios," and there'll be a document and there'll usually be the typical pros and cons of the options.

(01:07:12):
I'm like, "Let's say we weren't in the room as the leadership team," which is the one the team wants to get behind. Then you'll sometimes see the team hasn't even done the work between themselves talking. I'm like, "No, no, no, no, no. You need to go do the work." And if you have gotten to a point where you have conviction, but there is some risk, then let's talk about the risk that you need by help mitigating or help solving because that's too easy to come to me and be like, "Oh, here's A and B. You do the work and tell me which you one to pick." No way. No, that's not going to make you a better PM. Go figure out why you can't stand by A.

Lenny (01:07:47):
So the core to conviction is pick what you think is right. That seems like the core of it. Clarity is being very clear about what you've learned and where you think things are going and then conviction is pick your battle. Here's where we think we need to invest.

Ebi Atawodi (01:08:00):
Right. I like the word battle. Clarity is seeing that you are committed to actually fighting this war in the first place, right? There are lots of other things you can fight. This is the fight you're fighting in and why. And the conviction is how and the way you see the world if you win that battle.

Lenny (01:08:20):
Great. Okay, so you gave a talk on product culture and how the company culture informs and it changes the way the product is built. So you worked at three very different cultures that I'm aware of, Uber, Netflix, and Google. All very different companies. I guess maybe just as a broad question, what did you see about the culture of the company due to change the way product is built?

Ebi Atawodi (01:08:43):
You think about what Uber has done in the world and you think about where we are now where it's almost so natural to bring out your phone and the car turns up with someone you do not know that you get into and trust them to take you where you're going. If you fast forwarded to when my grandmother was alive, she would've thought you were crazy. So just think of all the pieces that had to come together for that to work. And it was a super hands-on, zoom out, zoom in. We say boardroom to streets. You could roll up your sleeves and go in the streets and then go to boardroom, operations team, that really went into the fabric of a city and tried to convert that mission into what the manifestation is in the city. And I started at Uber as a GM before I became a PM. So I firsthand experienced that. I got my job, there were seven cars on the road and I had to figure it out in a country where there's no reliable running water, we want to do reliable transport.

(01:09:44):
So what does that look like when drivers don't have a mobile phone? We didn't have [inaudible 01:09:49] So there's this big piece of the operations and what Uber basically did was we're going to work very hard to get the right people in seats. We're going to give them complete autonomy. And the magic that just came out of that is the reason that Uber exists and that infrastructure is very much what has allowed a lot of the gig economy actually thrive. Setting up these playbooks, trying things, learning, sharing with each other was a very big part of the culture. Now, over time, I call this the monolithic culture. There was a culture. And the culture of ever went back and said, "Hold on, let's revisit this. Does it still serve us? Has the context changed? What are the parts that we need to improve, evolve?" Because here's the thing, if you don't intentionally evolve the culture, it will evolve without you. So culture is always going to evolve. That's just the way humans are. And the culture are the norms and beliefs. And beliefs and norms change. That's how humans are.

(01:10:53):
So I always say, "What are the good behaviors that you reward and the bad behaviors that you condone?" And if you're not going back to revisit that, then the culture just moves on and then the company's out playing catch-up or it moves on in the way you don't want it to. And then the world is like, "Oh my god, Uber. Delete Uber," which actually happened. I lived it. It's very sad to wake up and know that you're doing the right thing for the world and see that 400,000 people have deleted your app just because of a miscommunication, really. So this is a really big piece of Uber. The spin there on the autonomy was one of the cultural values was the principle of confrontation and toe stepping. And this is codified in the value system. It's like, forget about levels, step on toes if you believe it's the right thing for the business. And I talk all the time about the story of cash, where Travis Kalanick was against cash.

(01:11:47):
By the way, I think up until he left Uber, he was against cash. But he believed in data and he believed in principle confrontation. And he was like, "Go test it out." And we tested it out and it did well. And that's why cash exists on Uber. Because the culture enabled that. So I've talked about how it evolves and also the [inaudible 01:12:06] of Uber. You go to Netflix where it started as a monolithic culture. It came out of, "Oh, we went through this experience where we had to cut the org down and we left these sets of people and they were performing just as well and had the same output and the same joy. Hey, what did we do right here? Let's distill this down and distill it down into this no-rules rules framework of [inaudible 01:12:34] responsibility of highly aligned, loosely coupled a few of these tenants at Netflix.

(01:12:42):
But I saw in my time, my very short time at Netflix when I left Netflix to go to YouTube, I saw the culture evolve in a very short space of time. There was a very high degree of intentionality to evolving the culture. What does it mean to entertain the world? Let's evolve, let's discuss, let's change. And so again, going into the product, when I joined Netflix, there was a whole value of the product would not ever be advertising video on demand. It's subscription video on demand because we believe if we, and it was a strong belief. It was a belief system. And then over time, there were debates and debates. I was a part of a lot of conversations around access. In a world where more people are on their mobile phone, do not have a TV screen, might not have a credit card, do we want to entertain the world or do we want to entertain some people in some places? Sounds familiar, right? This is what we also had at Uber. Do we want to offer Uber to the world or just some people in some places who have credit cards?

(01:13:50):
So I saw that conversation go back and forth and the company allowed a structured way of having these debates. So you would typically be encouraged to write down things. Write your argument but ultimately it's Lenny's decision. And it's funny when the buck stops with you, how the whole thing flips on its head. You'd think it would be chaos. It's actually not. You actually saw people go a lot more methodically around, okay, I need to make sure. I remember when we talked about conviction earlier, we said, how do you get the firmness in your conviction? I saw people do that work. Be like, okay, I'm at 95%. Can I get to 99%? What would I need to do that? And because the buck stops with you, right? In a world where people can sign up to multimillion dollar deals. So without any approval, it's actually quite liberating but it's the liberation that's frightening.

(01:14:47):
So you saw this and this intentionality involving the culture and now going back to subscription video on demand, because you would write things down and people kept debating and pushing and pushing, there's now advertising on Netflix. That's a culture that allows the product.

Ebi Atawodi (01:15:01):
... right? That's a culture that allows the product to sort of evolve and change tenets. And then you see Google where it's very much just this, I sort of use this story of two little fish swimming in the water and the old fish goes past them and says, "Hey, how's the water?" And they're like, "Good." And then they swim along and they go, "What's water?" That's a little bit of what you get and it's like, we have this respect the user, respect the opportunity, respect each other, and that's all you get. That's it. That's it.

(01:15:41):
What is Googling? You know it when you see it, but what is Googling? And so it allows for when you have this, what I call, the microcultures, where the culture within YouTube is different from the culture within cloud is different from the one in photos, different from the one in maps. You actually hear people say, "Oh, they came from search because they have a culture in search, which if you say you're going to deliver two basis points, you're delivering two basis points, right? And there's a different culture and assistant where it's like, "Oh, experiment and try things and so on."

(01:16:14):
So the culture almost becomes, it almost feels like a city, right? So I'm in Amsterdam and there's a culture in De Pijp and there's a culture in Amsterdam-Noord, where all the hipsters are, and there's a culture in West, right? It's the same in San Francisco. There's a culture if you're in the Mission and you're in all of those things. So essentially what you then end up with is these microcultures, but then there is this looser macro culture that allows the flex of the culture so it manifests in different ways.

(01:16:45):
And what that means for the product is, you end up with a company like Google, where one side of the business is building something like cloud, another part's building something that's heavily data-centric, another part's building something very human. Give everyone a voice, show them the world. That's YouTube, right? And you were able to do that because the culture allows that flex.

Lenny (01:17:04):
When you think of Uber versus Lyft and then there's Airbnb versus there's this company Wimdu that was one of their main competitors. There's these German guys. It's interesting. In the case of Uber, they're very aggressive versus Lyft was nice brand. But in the case of Airbnb, Airbnb was the very nice culture and brand and Wimdu was extremely aggressive, just very hardcore. And it's interesting in some markets, maybe you win going really hard and aggressive and just like... Another Uber value, I think was, find your red line.

Ebi Atawodi (01:17:37):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (01:17:38):
Just find your limit and get there, and that's where you're going to work. And then in hospitality, maybe there's an advantage to being an Airbnb where it's more warm and fuzzy. So that's interesting, that depending on the market, maybe a different culture has a bigger opportunity to win. Never thought of it that way before.

Ebi Atawodi (01:17:53):
What I saw that was interesting about Uber was there was a core that was very monolithic about, this is the culture and you hired people from all walks of life that live and breathe that culture, but there was a lot of magic that came out of a culture that also had the city at the core.

(01:18:14):
So celebrate cities was one of the core things, and customer obsessed was another value. So if you're customer obsessed and the culture says celebrate cities, then you know what? Maybe when we do ice cream in Nigeria, we're going to put this spin on it. We do Uber ice cream in San Francisco, we're going to put that spin on it.

(01:18:33):
So there's also this element of like, I could... Nice isn't the word I would use, but it was very accessible to anyone because it met them where they were. The product met them where they were. And I think that opened the roads for... No other company has been able to create ride sharing at that kind of scale. It's very region by region and I think it's because of that.

Lenny (01:18:54):
I think one of the other interesting things about culture is every team also has its own culture and part of PM and a PM leader's job is to create that culture and create good vibes and be a recent guest, put it, you're the emotional center of the team. Is there anything you do on your teams to create that culture to make sure everyone's feeling good and excited and create good vibes?

Ebi Atawodi (01:19:16):
So I actually spent time with both my VP and my peers, my engineering and design partners, and we have a little acronym called BEM, because it's Brian, Ebi, Matilde. And I kind joke, I'm like, "BEM." So BEM got together and created a cult. We discussed the culture that we wanted to have on the team because indeed, it's how do you work? And by the way, just fun fact, the reason I ended up at Netflix and got obsessed about Netflix actually, was when I was at Uber and we started all this evolving beyond this what we call Uber 1.0... So I'm very Uber 1.0. I joined Uber as employee number 1024. It's a very different Uber. As the culture was going out and in a way, in my mind, losing a little bit of the conviction that the other one had and becoming kind of like a catchall.

(01:20:11):
It's pivoted in the right way now, but it kind of swung the other way. I actually had my product marketing partner, his wife worked at Netflix and so he sends me the Netflix culture memo. To your point, I created a culture of Netflix within my team at Uber. And so the values that actually I have carried through, kind of go back to those. I do believe in this freedom or responsibility. I will give you freedom, but with that comes responsibility. That means the buck stops with you. We had a similar one at Uber, which was, owner, not a renter.

Lenny (01:20:45):
Speaking of Airbnb.

Ebi Atawodi (01:20:46):
Yeah. Owner, not a renter. How would you act if this house was yours versus when you rent, right? And so it's that buck stops with you, kind of mentality. Then there's this other one that I really think about which is, there's an informed captain. And so, I'm in too many conversations where I'm like, "Who is on the hook for this decision? Who cares if this decision is made?" It's not like six people with consensus. Who is the person?

(01:21:11):
And I'm very big on people on count [inaudible 01:21:14]. A lot of people are like, "Well, but there are five of us." And I'm like, "No, no, no. There's one person who owns this decision and that's the person that we're going to empower to get all the context, get all the input, to make the decision." Right? And it's like the rapid model where you end up with the decider.

(01:21:29):
And then, I think one for me, and this is just something I'm very passionate about, I'm a Black woman. I think a lot about how I show up in the workspace. And for me, something that's so crucial is I say vulnerability is your strength, right? And so we're all human. We're all fantastically flawed in many ways.

(01:21:51):
And so I really, really fundamentally believe in this whole, who's the human behind the role and how's that human doing? And I don't optimize for being liked to be very... And it sounds very harsh. I do not believe in being liked. That's Ebi. I believe in being loved, right? And that's a very, very different thing. And when I said this once in a meeting, people were like... Yes. Right? But it took me a while and reading a lot of books to come to a definition of love, and love is the choice to extend yourself for the spiritual growth of oneself or another. Right?

(01:22:32):
It's very big and lofty and whatever, but you're literally extending yourself for somebody else or yourself, self-love. Right? And that's love. And when you're extending yourself, you're not nice. It's not always nice or like. It's sometimes is having hard conversations. It's knowing that, "Oh, there's a human." Matilde, my engineering partner or Brian, my engineering partner, whoever those are, they know I care about them.

(01:22:59):
So when the feedback is coming like raw, they know that it's in their best interest because I've shown them enough times that I genuinely care about the person behind the role. I feel like that brings the most powerful thing a team has. You'll see teams just tactically, they'll write a PRD, they'll send the PRD outside to the world, right? To the other partners and I'm like, "Have you spoken to the other PMs on your team? Have they read it? Because actually, it might help you write a better PRD."

(01:23:28):
And so in my team now, we have our email distro. Gmail allows you to do the plus thing, plus PRD, and just ship your PRD, even when it's getting date. And people will just help you shape it because we all care about each other. So it's a very, I know fuzzy and whatnot, but I do really believe in this thing of, if we get back to the core of humanity and there's a human behind the role and they have goals and aspirations, and if you care and love them, the rest of it will follow.

Lenny (01:23:58):
Wow. I love this. You shared a trick for getting a sense of, if you have a good relationship with your EM, kind of along these lines, can you share that? But this was before we started recording.

Ebi Atawodi (01:24:09):
I did, I did. And it came from when I first got into product management, I was a PM in training, called a PM trial. And my engineering manager was an associate EM, sort of EM in trial and we hated each other. We absolutely hated each other. And now, we love... There was love in the end and he... Still a very good friend of mine and it came down to first this... I asked this question.

(01:24:36):
Do you know your engineering manager's birthday? It's the day they showed up in the world. It's the most important day for them. It's the day they showed up the world. Do you know their birthday? Do you know their work anniversary? Do you know why they're doing the job they're doing or what they want to be? Are they trying to be a VP? Are they trying to go grow a startup? What is it?

(01:24:59):
And so, if you go to this sort of human element of trying to actually bond with the person. We'll do fun things where we'll just go to a show together or something or have lunch or dinner. Because if I'm spending half of my waking life at work, right? You sleep eight hours. The remaining time is 16 hours and you work, let's say, eight hours if you're lucky, right? You work eight hours. If I'm spending that time with someone, I kind of want to have fun while I'm doing it and you'll have fun when you like each other, you love each other, even better.

Lenny (01:25:33):
Ebi, I wish I got to work with you. You're awesome. By the way, this EM you're talking about is Gergely Orosz, who was on the podcast.

Ebi Atawodi (01:25:41):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:25:41):
He's the author of Pragmatic Engineer. People may be aware of him already. So how about that?

Ebi Atawodi (01:25:46):
And I knew he loved to write, so every time we would do a doc for example, to leadership, he would start. He would kick it off. Even though it was something product centric, he would start writing it. I'm like, "Great, you're an awesome writer."

Lenny (01:25:59):
Look at him now. [inaudible 01:26:02]. Maybe as just the last topic, I'd love to hear any cool stuff happening on YouTube. Stuff that you... I think you just launched some AI stuff, there's AB testing stuff that's coming out. Just like what should people know about new YouTube features, especially people like me that aren't publishing stuff on YouTube?

Ebi Atawodi (01:26:15):
Well, I'll go to one of the things we talked about, which is this once upon a time vision. One of the visions we have as a team is, if you go back to the core of YouTube which is, give everyone a voice, share it in the world, it's really this... YouTube is for creators big and small, who want to tell their story however they want to tell it, whether it's a podcast or live or video or short or post, and that we are the creative partner. Maybe that's another podcast for another day, but I fundamentally believe in when products take on some kind of persona. Right?

(01:26:52):
And so we're like, "Okay, YouTube Studio..." Really, we're the creative partner. We're not making the thing. You're making the thing, but we are partnering it. We're the ones giving you insights. We're the ones helping you with testing things that might work and if we could make your life easier, then you could just go do the fun stuff of telling your stories, right? So there are a couple of exciting things coming.

(01:27:16):
So one of them is AI inspiration, which we launched at Made on YouTube and when you talk to creators, and I always ask creators this question, "Tell me your creative process." There's always this big piece that's like the research, where they come up with an idea and they kind of flesh it out. In your case, maybe it's finding the person and it's reading about them. This is pre-work that they do and sometimes they'll do work by looking at tweets or watching other YouTube creators or listening to other things.

(01:27:47):
And so imagine a world where we can actually use AI to generate ideas for you based on what we know your community of subscribers and viewers are watching, right? So that's what I'm very excited about in some future world where I'd love to see you using that. It's going to launch next year. There's already a version of it in YouTube Studio where you can just type in a word, you could be like vision. And then it will give you ideas and other videos and topics and keywords that are being searched. That's one exciting one.

(01:28:20):
Another really exciting one is we launched thumbnail Test and Compare. So creators spend a lot of time on thumbnails, a lot of time. And we've been working a lot with creators. We've been very systematic about just getting feedback and getting it out there. It's just rolled out even to a bigger set of creators yesterday, actually. By the time this comes out probably... You might have it in your hands, Lenny. And so you're able to basically put two thumbnails, up to three, two, three thumbnails, and the system will actually AB test them and see which one actually works versus you sort of designing a thumbnail and then [inaudible 01:29:01] it out. So that's another exciting area.

Lenny (01:29:04):
Dreams coming true. I can't wait to try that. It feels like it's like the edit button for Twitter where it's like, "Come on. Why don't we have this?" And here it is. That's awesome. Yeah, I've been trying to do some more testing on that stuff and there's all these clunky tools people have built that are hacky on top of YouTube to try to do this for you, so I'm really excited to try that. Before we get to a very exciting lightning round, is there anything else you want to leave listeners with? Anything else you wanted to touch on or share?

Ebi Atawodi (01:29:26):
I think one of the questions I get a lot of the time is, how can I be a PM? How can I convert into product management? And I just want to say, I'm this Nigerian girl. I don't have an MBA, I didn't work in consulting, and I'm here, right? And I genuinely think that some of the best product managers come from something else because you have empathy for being on the other side. And so, what I always say to people is, " There's a power of 10,000 hours," and you see a lot of the stuff I spoke about.

(01:30:04):
There's a lot of this kind of immersing yourself. So already start product management, doing product management before you're a product manager. Open up your favorite apps. What are the top 10 problems you see? In your head, design what the world could look like if you fix them, right? And what you do by doing that is this constant training of your product sense. So when the opportunity comes, you don't get lucky, right? But you get, it's opportunity meets preparation. You're already prepared.

Lenny (01:30:31):
I love that. By the way, I think you're the third Nigerian guest on this podcast. There's something in the water in Nigeria that's creating a lot of great product leaders.

Ebi Atawodi (01:30:43):
[inaudible 01:30:43]. They say, "Get you a Nigerian friend. We keep it real."

Lenny (01:30:45):
Well. With that. We've reached a very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Ebi Atawodi (01:30:45):
I'm ready.

Lenny (01:30:49):
All right. What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Ebi Atawodi (01:30:55):
I really, really love this book called, 48 Laws of Power. I know it sounds very Machiavellian. Beautiful book. Another book that is one of my absolute favorites, is The God of Small Things. It's a beautifully written, really wonderful book. And more recently, a book that keeps popping up in my mind is Outliers by Malcolm Gladwell. Such a beautiful book because it just goes back to what we talked about earlier, it helps you see that there are patterns in certain things, right? Yeah. It's been coming out maybe quite a lot. I'm a voracious reader, by the way. Find me on Goodreads. I read a lot.

Lenny (01:31:43):
Oh, that's amazing. We will find that. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoyed?

Ebi Atawodi (01:31:48):
Oh, my God, The Bear. Just The Bear. Go watch it. It feels like being a PM, honestly. The Bear is the show, I think it's on Star or Disney.

Lenny (01:31:58):
Hulu.

Ebi Atawodi (01:31:59):
Hulu. That's the one in the US. Yes. It's about a chef. It's so well done. Beautiful cinematography, but also, you feel the heat in that kitchen. You feel it.

Lenny (01:32:12):
It's very stressful to watch that show.

Ebi Atawodi (01:32:14):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:32:15):
Second season's less stressful, at least. In my-

Ebi Atawodi (01:32:18):
Wait. Do you know the season is less stressful because the restaurant is closed? That's beautiful cinematography. The pace goes down and it picks up when the restaurant's open again.

Lenny (01:32:29):
Oh, yeah, that last-

Ebi Atawodi (01:32:29):
Do you agree?

Lenny (01:32:31):
Yeah. Interestingly, The Bear has been the most recurring recommended show on this podcast recently.

Ebi Atawodi (01:32:36):
No [inaudible 01:32:37].

Lenny (01:32:37):
There's a phase of Last of Us, there's a phase of White Lotus and now it's The Bear. So we'll see what comes next.

Ebi Atawodi (01:32:43):
Damn it. I want to be contrary now. I'm trying to think of something else.

Lenny (01:32:47):
I've been a huge fan of this new show on HBO called, Scavengers Reign, if folks haven't seen that. It's incredible. It's animated and sci-fi ish and it's just like, "Wow." I can't wait to watch more. Anyway, that's my answer. It's not about me. Let's keep going. What's a favorite interview question that you'd like to ask candidates that you're interviewing?

Ebi Atawodi (01:33:06):
Two questions. If they're a people manager, what is your leadership philosophy? The amount of leaders who have never thought about that is quite scary. And if you're just pure product chops, tell me your favorite product, product you're most passionate about, and why. And I live for the storytelling. Do you start with a problem? I wake up in the morning. I'm always looking for the mood. Music is a backdrop to my life and I open up Spotify and it just finds exactly what I need to... I've just told you the problem and the solution, right? So I look for those kind of things. Then I'll ask, if you could improve it, what would you do?

Lenny (01:33:42):
I love it. That's an awesome one. What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you love, whether it's physical or digital?

Ebi Atawodi (01:33:51):
There's a product I'm using a lot now, very simplistic. It's a product called Sleep Cycle. It basically allows you set an alarm but a progressive music alarm to wake you up because I don't want that jarring like [inaudible 01:34:07] in the morning. It kind of just gets me there, but it also tracks my sleep using the microphone. So it tells me whether I'm coughing or whether I woke up, or I'm snoring if I'm in the wrong position. It also shows stats. When I'm in Nigeria, I snore less than everybody. When I'm in certain countries, I snore more than everybody. So it's a really cool app.

Lenny (01:34:30):
It feels like... We have a Nana to watch our kid. It's like a camera that's watching him sleep all day and I feel like I need that for me because it tells you when he was woken up, how long he's been sleeping. That's awesome. It's called Sleep Cycle. Okay. We'll link to that in the show notes. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to or share with friends or find useful just either in your day life or in work?

Ebi Atawodi (01:34:52):
I'm going to pull it up. It's a poem called, Invictus. And I love this quote because he was going through issues with his leg and was actually going to potentially lose it, and then wrote this quote. I want to read the last part. It's worth reading, looking up. It says, "It matters not how strait the gate, how charged with punishments the scroll, I am the master of my fate, I am the captain of my soul." And the last two lines that, "I am the master of my fate, I am the captain of my soul," is literally my Twitter thing, right? Or X. com, whatever we're calling it now. [inaudible 01:35:33]. It's such a powerful reminder of freedom or responsibility.

Lenny (01:35:38):
And also I think, I love... This touches on something you also shared earlier of just agency over your fate. You are responsible. Even though you may not be responsible for what happened, you're responsible for what you're going to do about it. And I think that for being a great PM, that's such an important thing. It's so easy just to complain and like, "Oh, we don't have our resources. We keep changing plans. We're losing engineers." But the more you feel like you are in control and you're responsible for what's going on, the better things end up going.

Ebi Atawodi (01:36:07):
Absolutely.

Lenny (01:36:08):
And that's a beautiful way of putting it. Amazing. And we'll link to that poem. Final question. Before we started recording, you told me you'd do DJing on the side or I don't know, maybe full-time. I don't know. I guess, one, where can folks find your DJ sets if you put them out? And then two, I guess, any advice for someone that wants to start getting into DJ Ness, what could they do to start going down that path to learn how to do it?

Ebi Atawodi (01:36:30):
It goes back to this, "I'm the master of my fate, I'm a captain of my soul." One thing I love and one of the things that's brought me to YouTube is just a power of what you can learn and learning through YouTube. And so I used to DJ initially, 15 years ago when it was still vinyl and then I quit because I was like, it's either I do design at the time, because I started as an engineer, then I was a designer. Either I do design or I do DJing, and I stopped.

(01:36:58):
And then a year ago, my Burning Man Camp was like, we need a DJ. So I needed to go DJ at Burning Man. And so I went on YouTube and I just followed all these DJ creators. The game has changed, I will say that. And so I have my mixtapes on YouTube. So if you look for my name, Ebi Atawodi. My handles, it's always Ebi Atawodi, my name and my surname. You'll see all kinds of videos, but you'll also see my mixtapes and I name each mixtape after a sauce. So one's called Sriracha, the last one was called Mango Chutney, and there's one coming up soon that I'm calling Jerk.

Lenny (01:37:39):
Amazing. And then, yeah, I guess is your advice. Then just watch YouTube. Go look for people teaching you how to DJ on YouTube and...

Ebi Atawodi (01:37:46):
Go watch people and I cannot underestimate the power of those 10,000 hours to become an expert. So just DJ. I got this really cheap controller. It costs me 300 bucks, but you can actually do it on an iPad. And even when I'm on flights, I'll do a full mix on my iPad with the app. I use this app called DJ Pro AI, and it's like, I don't know, 30 bucks or something. And I just DJ because I'm training, right? I'm just training and it's for me. Then I'll come home and I'll do it with the actual controller and record it, and put it on YouTube for fun.

Lenny (01:38:24):
So cool. Ebi, I'm in the Ebi fan club. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to follow up on anything and how can listeners be useful to you?

Ebi Atawodi (01:38:35):
I'm on pretty much every social platform. My handle is Ebi Atawodi, my name. Work stuff, LinkedIn, Twitter, Instagram, all of it. And this is maybe a bigger one. I think we will all be more useful to ourselves if we actually spend a lot more time being a bit more present and mindful. The world will be a better place if people just went into themselves and were a bit more mindful. I'm very big into meditation, so I think that's why I ask for everyone, be more mindful.

Lenny (01:39:13):
You're reminding me to breathe. Amazing. What a beautiful way to end it. Ebi, thank you so much for being here.

Ebi Atawodi (01:39:19):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:39:23):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show, @lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Elena Verna (00:00:00):
The most important thing in product-led sales is that there is a different configuration internally of collaboration that needs to occur. In traditional sales world, marketing creates pipeline for sales. Sales sells product. Product engages with a paid user to drive retention. In the product-led sales, product acquires and activates a customer and product creates pipeline for sales, so relationship is not that there's a go-to-market org with marketing and sales and product just kind of throws features across the fence for them to sell. 

(00:00:40):
The collaboration here is between product and sales, but that means the product has to take on accountability over pipeline. The worst thing that you can do is to say, "I'm going to do product-led growth," or, "I'm going to do product-led sales and I'm going to do it in marketing." Recipe for disaster. You'll be failure mode within six months because product has to take accountability over selling of the product itself. 

Lenny (00:01:09):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today, my guest is Elena Verna. If that name sounds familiar, Elena is a return guest and you be the judge, but I think this episode is even better than the first, which is a very high bar because that first episode continues to be one of the most popular of the podcast. Elena has worked at or advised companies like Miro, Amplitude, SurveyMonkey, MongoDB, Netlify, and a dozen others. She's also a longtime instructor and EIR at Reforge where she helped create their experimentation, monetization, growth, leadership, and their soon-to-be released PLG course. 

(00:01:51):
In this conversation, we go incredibly deep into the emerging space of product-led sales. Elena explains what exactly is product-led sales, how it fits together with product-led growth and sales-led growth, who and when you should consider investing product-led sales, how product-led sales changes your approach to sales and marketing, what sorts of data, tooling, and people you need in place to do it well, and what common pitfalls you need to avoid. I've said this before and I'll say it again, Elena is possibly the smartest and most experienced growth person in the world, especially when it comes to B2B, and I never get tired of learning from her. Enjoy this episode with Elena Verna after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:35):
This episode is brought to you by Linear. Let's be honest, the sheet tracker isn't very helpful. Why is it that it always seems to be working against you instead of working for you? Why does it feel like such a chore to use? Well, Linear is different. It's incredibly fast, beautifully designed, and it comes with powerful workflows that streamline your entire product development process from issue tracking all the way to managing product roadmaps. Linear is designed for the way modern software teams work. 

(00:03:05):
What users love about Linear are the powerful keyboard shortcuts, efficient GitHub integrations, cycles that actually create progress and built-in project updates that keep everyone in sync. In short, it just works. Linear is the default tool of choice among startups and it powers a wide range of large established companies such as Vercel, Retool, and Cash App. See for yourself why product teams describe using Linear as magical. Visit linear.app/lenny to try Linear for free with your team and get 25% off when you upgrade. That's linear.app/lenny.

(00:03:44):
This episode is brought to you by Braintrust, where the world's most innovative companies go to find talent fast so that they can innovate faster. Let's be honest, it's a lot of work to build a company, and if you want to stay ahead of the game, you need to be able to hire the right talent quickly and confidently. Braintrust is the first decentralized talent network where you can find, hire, and manage high-quality contractors in engineering, design, and product for a fraction of the cost of agencies. Braintrust charges a flat rate of only 10%, unlike agency fees of up to 70%, so you can make your budget go four times further. Plus, they're the only network that takes 0% of what the talent makes, so they're able to attract and retain the world's best tech talent. 

(00:04:27):
Take it from DoorDash, Airbnb, Plaid, and hundreds of other high-growth startups that have shaved their hiring process from months to weeks at less than a quarter of the cost by hiring through Braintrust's network of 20,000 high-quality vetted candidates ready to work. Whether you're looking to fill in gaps, upscale your staff, or build a team for that dream project that finally got funded, contact Braintrust and you'll matched with three candidates in just 48 hours. Visit usebraintrust.com/lenny or find them in my show notes for today's episode. That's usebraintrust.com/lenny for when you need talent yesterday.  

(00:05:06):
Elena, welcome back to the podcast.

Elena Verna (00:05:09):
Thank you for having me back. I thought I would be the first returning guest. I'm a little bit upset that I am been beat by Casey, so you should explain yourself on that one.

Lenny (00:05:19):
Okay, here's the explanation. You're the first that we rebooked back and then this one just kind of got pushed a little bit and Casey had a slot earlier, so technically you were the first scheduled return guest.

Elena Verna (00:05:31):
All right, all right. I'll accept that.

Lenny (00:05:34):
Okay, great. I'm off the hook. I guess I'll just say I am really excited to have you back. Your episode that we did maybe a year ago is still one of the most popular episodes of all time. I still see people tweeting about it and sharing it, and so I am really excited to have you back and have a take two.

Elena Verna (00:05:48):
I'm excited to be back. Let's dive in.

Lenny (00:05:51):
Before we get into the content, when we met last time you were Interim Head of Growth at Amplitude. What are you up to now? What's happened in the past year?

Elena Verna (00:06:00):
I just wrapped up interim gig at Amplitude in February, so it's just been a couple of months since then. I'm passively exploring if I'm going to take another interim position, but between interim roles I always take about six to eight months of break because interim rolls are very intense because there's so many deliverables that are loaded in in the first year that you're working at the company, so I'm just advising. I have incredible companies that I started advising such as Veed.io and Sanity and Clockwise, and I'm building up my next level of frameworks that I'm going to dive into potentially a new interim position to prototype.

Lenny (00:06:38):
Ooh. If people are listening to this and they're like, "How do I get to work with Elena?", should people reach out to you? Are you booked up? What do you suggest?

Elena Verna (00:06:47):
I'll never take down an opportunity to have a great conversation and to learn about the business and to see how I can be helpful, but I'm not proactively sourcing clients, but that doesn't mean that I don't have availability to schedule something in the future.

Lenny (00:07:02):
Awesome, so if it's amazing enough, you're open to it?

Elena Verna (00:07:05):
Absolutely, always. 

Lenny (00:07:06):
Okay, great. Okay, here we go. Great [inaudible 00:07:07]-

Elena Verna (00:07:08):
I always have to be-

Lenny (00:07:08):
... [inaudible 00:07:08].

Elena Verna (00:07:08):
... open to new opportunities, yes.

Lenny (00:07:10):
I love that. I feel the same way. FOMO. FOMO kicks in. Anyway, as you know, we're going to be devoting this entire podcast to just one topic, which is product-led sales, which is this go-to-market motion that seems to have emerged over the past year maybe a bit longer and just feels like there's this increasing amount of interest and also this increasing amount of confusion around what it is, how to approach it, who it's right for. We're going to spend the next hour diving really deep into product-led sales.

Elena Verna (00:07:39):
Let's go for it.

Lenny (00:07:40):
Let's do it. Okay, so let's just start with a bigger picture kind of question of just, how do you define product-led sales? What is product-led sales, especially when it comes to what is it versus product-led growth?

Elena Verna (00:07:54):
Great question, so let's start with product-led growth. We've talked about it a little bit in our first episode, but let's revisit the topic. Product led growth is all about product's ability to self-serve activate, self-serve engage, and convert that usage to a monetization opportunity. You bring people, you get them to an aha moment into the habit loops, and then you able to extract value back out of them. Extraction of the value can be direct where you're actually capturing revenue from them, or it can be indirect where they're participating in your growth model via virality or user-generated content and bring additional business through the doors. 

(00:08:34):
Let's talk about direct phase to capture that value. There's self-serve monetization, so I'm using product self-serve. I go to the pricing page. I find the plan that best suits me on features that I want to unlock or usage that I want to unlock and I buy it. However, that's not the only way to monetize that usage. You can monetize that usage with sales, too. Why? Self-serve monetization has a cap of about $10,000. That's just how much we're able to process on the credit cards before they start getting flagged and declined by the banks and how much we as a consumers and prosumers are even willing to put on our credit card because not all credit cards have limits of over 10, 20, 30, $40,000. 

(00:09:15):
Self-serve monetization is very much a prosumer use case where an individual is trying to solve the problem on their own. Product-led sales converts the usage that you've generated via self-serve into a sales opportunity and it attaches a salesperson to close a much larger contract, which can be 15, 20, a hundred thousand dollars in order to bring an enterprise-level solution to a company that has already been using it in a self-serve manner.

Lenny (00:09:44):
Amazing. Would you say that product-led growth has always been in a sense product-led sales because sales was involved and theirs has been kind of like way of describing it? Or is this a new trend and way of approaching product-led growth?

Elena Verna (00:09:59):
Product-led growth has actually started more on individual use case-

Lenny (00:10:06):
Mm-hmm.

Elena Verna (00:10:06):
... so an individual has a problem. They have a job to be done. They come into the product and they solve it, and that was product-led growth in a nutshell for a lot of the B2B companies. However, if you're going to attach a salesperson, there is nobody in the company that is going to pay 10, 15, $20,000 for one individual to solve their problem. Product-led sales assumes that there's a migration from an individual use case that you acquired an end user with and an escalation into an enterprise-level solution that solves enterprise-level problems. Let me break it down and let me use just, for example, Amplitude as an example.

Lenny (00:10:46):
Mm-hmm.

Elena Verna (00:10:47):
Amplitude, individual, what is individual wanted with Amplitude? I need data at my fingertips to make better decisions for my product, so I'm going to put an Amplitude SDK into my product and it gives me behavioral data to help me build my pillar better. What is the company-level solution? Well, it's more self-serve ability of the data. It's democratization of data. It's enhanced insights in the more data-driven culture. That's what company's solving for. Individual is not solving for data-driven culture. Individual is just solving for data insights for them. Company's solving for data-driven culture.

(00:11:25):
In product-led growth, you can just have an individual be very happy with their solution for their job to be done. However, what product-led sales assumes is that there is an escalator to an enterprise-level solution, and enterprise escalator is valuable to attach sales resources to because products fundamentally do a really bad job at communicating enterprise-level value prop. They're very good at showing you as a user what you can do. They've very terrible at showing what organization actually can benefit out of the solution.

(00:12:02):
Sales can tell that story. Sales can bridge that gap, and then you can increase the perceived value in order to bridge the gap to that $15,000, 20, hundred-thousand dollar contract. I would say self-serve monetization is very much an individual use case versus product-led sales is turning that individual use case and self-serve usage into a sales pipeline with enterprise-level value.

Lenny (00:12:28):
I really like that way of thinking about it. Basically product-led growth has a ceiling. You're only going to get-

Elena Verna (00:12:32):
Yes.

Lenny (00:12:33):
... so high in terms of spend. You can only explain things so much to a potential user and then sales comes in and solves a lot of those problems, and product-led sales is essentially this. I think you even have this visualization now that I'm thinking about-

Elena Verna (00:12:33):
It's a bridge.

Lenny (00:12:45):
... as a bridge. Right, yeah, this bridge between the two, and so in this world of product-led sales, does sales as a function, outbound sales, continue to exist? One, and then two, is it radically different in this world of product-led sales?

Elena Verna (00:12:59):
Yeah, so to understand how sales should be applied in the situation, you need to understand end user's motivation, ability, and permission. Simple organization, so for example, if the end user is very motivated, they have full sense of ability to solve the problem and they have all of the permission from organization, or maybe not even permission, maybe forgiveness from organization, to go and explore and bring in a new solution. Then, it can be a very much organic motion up that escalator. However, that's not always the case. A lot of times the end users miss permission of solving enterprise-level problems. There's lots of stakeholders, there's a committee that has to make a decision. It impacts departments outside of their purview and maybe they even lack ability to do it. Maybe they can do their little job to be done, but not the entire enterprise-level integration. 

(00:13:55):
In my Amplitude example, yeah, I can drop an SDK in my product area, but how do I convince entire product to adopt Amplitude and put an SDK on every single interaction across the entire app? There is different level problem statements, and this is where product-led sales is either can be a truly organic motion where people raise their hands, they submit sales forms and there's already a need, a desire, an understanding of it, or end user might hit friction points. Product-led sales has to bridge those friction points by either attracting the right decision-makers to the process so they can find an enterprise buyer out there. They can understand who's the champion and what their capabilities and what their permission levels are. They can create a committee for the decision.

(00:14:46):
There is... They almost slap a bandaid on the problem of people not be able to and not wanting to necessarily resolve the problem on their own. They can be very powerful with that as well as marketing because we cannot forget about marketing where they can educate of how to help people bridge that gap and how to sell things internally.

Lenny (00:15:06):
You mentioned this idea of enterprise-level problems. It might help if you give an example or two of what those might be. Then, also, just what are examples of companies that are doing enterprise or product-led sales well just to kind of give people a mental model as you're talking about some of this stuff?

Elena Verna (00:15:22):
Sure, so let's go through a couple of them. Let's go through Miro. Miro is an online whiteboarding platform. What is individual problem that people come to Miro to solve? They have a workshop they need to facilitate. Maybe they need a board to just do brainwriting in and they use Miro for individual jobs to be done. However, what Miro is designed for is a team-level problem. I come in and I bring you in and we collaborate together, so now there's two, three, four people involved, but even that is still on the project level, it's on the team level. Nobody's going to pay a hundred thousand dollars to solve a team-level small problem that is solving. What is the enterprise-level problem? It's increased innovation, it's increased productivity across the entire team because now we have this new outlet in which we can collaborate. 

(00:16:10):
Now, can Miro very clearly show increase in productivity across the organization by using the product? No. Can sales tell the story? Yes. Miro takes you from an individual user to a team step, and then sales bridges the gap to an enterprise. Let's give another example of Figma. In Figma, I come in as a designer and I just need a better way to capture feedback from my stakeholders, a more scalable way to capture it so I can iterate on the perfect design. What is it at the team level? Now there is a team that can collaborate with me more openly. I can capture more feedback from more stakeholders faster and get the project done sooner.

(00:16:53):
What is it on the enterprise level? Well, on enterprise level, our designs are just better fit the business needs. They have faster turnaround time and our product is performing better. That's an enterprise-level value prop and, again, we're, I think, in the product development space gotten a little bit lazy of actually showcasing that enterprise value in product. We rely on excellence of sales team to tell that story. I do hope that changes, by the way, in the future, that we put more pressure on the products to take it all the way up the escalator so we don't have to be a hundred percent dependent on the sales team going and showcasing that story. The product can really empower that escalator from the starting point till the end on its own.

Lenny (00:17:42):
I want to dig into that for sure. I know that's something you just shared on LinkedIn recently and I thought that was a really interesting topic, but before we get there, let's talk about this bridge a little bit more. People might be listening to this that are maybe a product-led growth company and they may feel like, "Hey, wait, we're already doing this. We have this product-led growth motion, we have a sales team. They figure out who to talk to." What exactly is in that bridge that makes product-led sales so interesting? I imagine it's like helping you identify who to go after, helping people go further and further and escalate it themselves. How do you think about that bridge between product and sales?

Elena Verna (00:18:15):
Let's talk about how product-led growth companies start with product-led sales. It usually starts by an organic demand from a user base. They reach out to them through support channels by just pinging people who work at the company saying, "Hey, I want to purchase this for my entire company." That's an organic pool that you start feeling from product-led growth model into enterprise sales world and, by the way, you should never hire any salespeople until you feel that pool because if nobody's asking to purchase, then you cannot just hire an SDR and make a purchase happen. You need to see those hand-raisers, you need to see those people demanding an enterprise-level adoption. Then, you hire starts hiring salespeople to actually suffice that demand and that's great, and you're starting to do sales and surfacing really addressing organic demand within your product.

(00:19:11):
That organic demand very quickly dries up if you rely on hand-raisers of your champions. If you rely on having enterprise buyers in your user base that are asking to just sign on the dotted line, then you have a very limited ceiling for your growth because what majority of the usage transforms to be is to have product qualification that there's a meaningful sales conversation that could occur based on the signals within usage that the buyer is missing. 90% of product-led sales is converting the usage into an opportunity by finding a buyer outside, by finding the decision-maker outside. This is where marketing and sales are so crucial in the process. Connecting that decision-maker to the usage and then driving an opportunity through sales funnel all the way to closed one deal.

(00:20:08):
It's great when you start having sales team and you're surfacing this organic demand. That's beautiful and power to you. Just it doesn't last very long just because end user fundamentally does not equal enterprise buyer and that organic demand ends up plateauing very shortly because you cannot just make enterprise buyers happen from your users.

Lenny (00:20:31):
If a founder is listening to this right now and they're like, "Okay, so I have maybe a product-led growth component, they're self-serve, maybe I have a sales team, maybe I don't," what's a sign that your product is a fit for investing in product-led sales? Essentially every product-led growth-oriented company should be eventually investing in this area. Or is there certain companies that are like, "No, you don't need to worry about it, just stay product-led growth forever or just stay sales-led growth forever?"

Elena Verna (00:20:57):
To have product-led sales means you're going upmarket-

Lenny (00:21:02):
Mm-hmm.

Elena Verna (00:21:04):
... period. That means you going for contract values that are probably over your sales floor, so the minimum that the sales is willing to engage and close, which is traditionally around $15,000. If you're going for contract values of $15,000, that means you're probably trying to close a hundred, $200,000 contracts as well. Who can handle a hundred, $200,000 contract? It's not going to be a small startup. It's not going to be an SMB. It's probably going to be higher end of more of a mid-market segment, so 200 employees-plus. More likely it's going to be towards the enterprise segment of a thousand employees-plus. 

(00:21:45):
If you are not ready to go upmarket, I would say keep it easy on the product-led sales because sales means quotas. Sales means large contract values. Sales means you are going upmarket whether you like it or not, and some products, they should stay in the prosumer individual space. Maybe they're geared towards contractors or freelancers or squarely towards startups. Those persons are not interested in talking to sales in the first place. They have much lower bearing of how much they're willing to spend, so their price sensitivity is much higher. They prefer to do all self-serve in the first place, so it's really need to be conscious about what that will do to your go-to-market motion because it definitely skews it and pulls it up. 

Lenny (00:22:36):
Got it, so what I'm hearing is that if you're starting as a self-serve-oriented product and you're starting to maybe hire for a salesperson, is the approach start approaching it from product-led sales motion versus now we're going to add the sales independent team that's kind of doing their own thing?

Elena Verna (00:22:55):
Right, so there's two ways to get to product-led sales. First little wave is that we talked about, I start as product-led growth company. I really started with this individual use case and I'm escalating to a company-level value prop and this is what I need product-led sales for. On the other side, I might start as a top-down sales traditional organization, so I have product that I only sell through sales. Those are usually anchored at larger segments in the first place. In order to build a top-down sales engine, you're most likely going after enterprise segment of a thousand-plus employees or maybe upper mid-market of 500 employees-plus. The reason to go into product-led sales is either your existing top-down motion is not working because customers need to see value before they sign the contract. They want to see that usage and at least the first signs of perceived value before they sign on the dotted line.

(00:23:49):
Or you're going downmarket and your fixed cost of sale that you have from the traditional sales motion does not scale. It stays fairly constant, yet your contract values are starting to drop as you're doing downmarket, so you want to create a lot more automation in the selling process to remove as many as possible humans out of it. You can approach it from both ways. Adding PLS on top of product-led growth or adding PLS on top of existing sales-led growth. For PLG, you're going upmarket by adding PLS. For SLG or sales-led growth, by adding PLS you're going downmarket.  

Lenny (00:24:27):
Awesome, and we're going to talk about how to actually build this infrastructure and what's required, but it reminds me one of the biggest takeaways from our first podcast and something I've quoted many times now, is your bet that every sales-led growth company needs to add a product-led growth element. Otherwise, they'll be disrupted by someone that does. Is that still your perspective?

Elena Verna (00:24:49):
Absolutely. Now, I think there's different stages of, what does it mean to add product-led growth elements? I think every sales-led company should be putting pressure on product to assist with the sales process. That does not mean that there is product-led growth, but there is a product assist in the existing sales-led motion that can materialize into product-led growth if you can truly solve for self-serve activation, self-serve engagement, and have product be able to sell itself. The biggest difference here that starts to come in, and that is so apparent in every single company, is that in B2B, unfortunately, we've let go of the products having accountability over monetization model. We've gotten into the spiral of product just builds a product and it throws it over the fence to marketing and sales to sell.

(00:25:38):
Marketing and sales have done an incredible job over the last couple of decades of coming up with these stories and elaborate playbooks of how to attract enterprise buyers and how to sell them this product. Product literally only obsesses after contract is closed and there's usage that starts materialize after contract close. We've alleviated our product management in B2B from monetization ownership. When a SLG company actually goes into product-assisted tactics or product-led growth, the biggest pain point is actually educating product team on how can you get product to sell itself, which is all about monetization awareness, monetization friction of conversion to get into the paid plan, and then having actual correct value metrics that are understood self-serve by the customer.

(00:26:29):
I mean, yes, I agree with you. Every single... I agree with myself, so I should say that every single sales-led company should at least add some product-assisted tactics, but I would even take it further that every sales-led company should start educating and putting pressure on the product to own monetization components of the business.

Lenny (00:26:50):
Let's pull on that thread a little bit more. What does that actually look like? Does the head of product for that or the head of product or specific group PMs, let's say, have revenue goals and responsible for P&L and things like that? Or what does that generally look like when they start to own revenue?

Elena Verna (00:27:08):
There's two ways that you can own revenue. Revenue stream one will be your self-serve revenue, and if there's self-serve revenue, that means product is selling literally itself, so yes, there has to be somebody in product that has self-serve revenue target. 

Lenny (00:27:26):
Hmm.

Elena Verna (00:27:27):
Now, a lot of times it doesn't fall in the core product managers. A lot of times it falls on the growth team, and that's because core product management is really focused on feature deliverability and just that incremental expansion of the core use case, and growth product management owns the product distribution strategy. Then, the PLG case, it would be a true self-serve monetization model. Now, when it comes to PLS, you don't own revenue target in my opinion, but what you do own is the pipeline that was created by product that you have a handshake with sales team over.

(00:28:02):
What that materializes in is product qualified accounts, and it's actually a product threshold of engagement that differs from activation and it differs from core engagement. It's what volume, velocity, feature breadth, or behavioral signals that account is throwing that says, "Hey, right now is the time to engage with sales." That is the bridge to monetization, that product team should own as a... even on the core team in order to drive a healthy, predictable, and sustainable pipeline to sales. 

Lenny (00:28:38):
Okay, so this is a really important topic. There's this concept you just described, product qualified account. It might be a good time to define a couple other acronyms and kind of compare them. THere's PQA, there's PQL, product-qualified lead. There's marketing-qualified lead. Can you just maybe describe the suite of acronyms? Then, I want to follow up on the PQA because that seems really important.

Elena Verna (00:28:59):
I'll start with PQA just because we just breezed over it. PQA is product-qualified account. It's on account level, it's aggregation of multiple users that are using the account. It might be on the overall logo level, so let's say you've attracted a company, so you qualify PQA across the entire company usage, or it might be on a specific team or workspace level depending on what is the better predictor for you and who the sales team is going to be engaging with. Product qualification is very much product metrics. It's the volume of use, it's the velocity change. For example, yesterday I've been adding one user per day and then today I've added 15 users to account. That's a velocity change that you need to pay attention to. Or there is a feature usage that can be highly correlative to enterprise interest. That product should be driving towards every single account reaching in order to qualify them for sales conversation.

(00:30:00):
Now, within the PQA, there may or may not be PQL, so PQL is a product-qualified lead. Lead assumes there is a person in the account that I can go and sell to. Now, leads are those buyers. They're those decision-makers in the account, and if you have a smaller segment, so for example you had more in small businesses or lower end of mid-market segment, you may very have PQLs in there because user is maybe equals buyer. User can make those buyer decisions. However, the more you move up the market, the more end user is many steps separated from the buyer, so you might have very healthy usage and you might have a PQA that is off the charts, but you don't have a PQL in it.

(00:30:47):
If you just stick your sales against that account, you're going to have a very terrible situation and very terrible user journey where users are like, "Why is sales talking to me? I have no decision-making power in my organization. I love the product, but please leave me alone." This is where you get a bunch of cold outbound, and I put big quotations on outbound emails that are just not getting returned. You need to very clearly understand who's your buying persona and, are they in your user base? If they are, you have a PQL. Pass them, go for it, but if they're not, go find it out there. This is where MQL concept really comes into play because then marketing has to still qualify a lead to bring it and connect it to PQA. PQA can have a PQL as a user already in the user base, or you might need an MQL with marketing or sales, bringing their lead over and connecting them with the usage.

Lenny (00:31:43):
Amazing, so we're going to share a link. You have this awesome visual that shows kind of like the funnel of PQAs and PQLs funneling into sales along with marketing qualified leads. Basically there's a kind of instead of one path to sales, knowing who to talk to, now there's two. Product is funneling you people that are qualified, and then marketing following you people that are qualified.

Elena Verna (00:32:06):
There is a third path. There might be a marketing funneling people that have no usage whatsoever and that is a true top-down lead, so you have three buckets of lead attribution that is coming in. I have usage and one of the users is my lead. I have usage. I have no lead in the account. Marketing is bringing me the lead, but I have to leverage that usage against that lead or have a lead coming through, there is no usage. I have to sell the entire thing still to them, so there's no context that I can use of existing usage. Those three channels are super important to identify. They all have very different conversion rates. They all have different playbooks of how you close them and, honestly, they require often different sales team to go after them because it's a very different sales enablement. 

Lenny (00:32:51):
You remind me of... You have so many hilarious memes that you share on LinkedIn. By the way, everyone listening should go follow Elena on LinkedIn and subscribe to our newsletter because it's hilarious and also informative. It's a magical combination. One of my favorite memes of yours is The Shining one that we just kind of touched on where someone's-

Elena Verna (00:33:09):
Oh.

Lenny (00:33:09):
... just using a product for five minutes and then, "Hey, do you want to," a sales guy just reaches out with the ax, "Hey, do you want to chat?"

Elena Verna (00:33:18):
That actually... It's painfully true. That's one of my most highly engaged memes that I've put out there. I have also one of the urinals where the man-

Lenny (00:33:28):
Oh, with the [inaudible 00:33:29].

Elena Verna (00:33:28):
... using the urinal and then like one comes over. A salesperson comes over. "Would you like to chat about our-

Lenny (00:33:33):
Right-

Elena Verna (00:33:33):
... "enterprise plan?"

Lenny (00:33:33):
... it's like 10 urinals and he's right next to yours. 

Elena Verna (00:33:36):
Yeah, exactly, so the piece here that a lot of companies miss, unfortunately, is that they jam product-led sales into a traditional top-down sales playbook. Now, what does that mean? In traditional top-down sales book, an MQL that you have or a lead that you gather already is in consideration cycles for your enterprise-level offering. However, in product-led sales, a new user that signs up, they know we're close to enterprise-level consideration. They're just trying to complete an individual job to be done. They're not solving a problem for their company. If you can imagine, it is like a very large funnel. You start with just users looking for problem solve. Then, you transition to awareness, consideration, and intent channels for team level problem. Then, you escalate for awareness, consideration, and intent channels for enterprise-level problem.

(00:34:41):
Top-down sales process goes after the bottom of that funnel where there's already an intent to solve company-level problem versus at the very top is where product-led growth starts on individual-level problem. It's a different timeline. If you go after individual user that just signs up for the account and you reach out to them 10 minutes later after sign-up asking, "What's your budget and are you ready to buy?", it's a complete mismatch of where they are in their consideration journey. You cannot consider a new product sign-up an MQL in the traditional sense. They're just not there yet. They have a fraction of the enterprise problem that they're solving and they're not ready to buy.

Lenny (00:35:26):
That's especially annoying because there's so many SaaS products now and everyone is coming for you, especially if you're at an awesome company that they're trying to sell, so got to be [inaudible 00:35:34]-

Elena Verna (00:35:26):
Yeah, I mean-

Lenny (00:35:34):
... [inaudible 00:35:34].

Elena Verna (00:35:35):
... anytime I even started... I remember I started at Amplitude when I started a year ago, it's like my inbox was just filled with like, "Now you're doing this, now you're doing this. Buy, buy, buy." I mean, I don't know, I can't even notice anything in that outbound [inaudible 00:35:52] unless somebody reaches out to me with something authentic that is already usage- based, it's ignore.

Lenny (00:35:59):
It's going to get worse with GPT-oriented cold outbound emails. Oh my God.

Elena Verna (00:35:59):
Absolutely.

Lenny (00:36:05):
This episode is brought to you by rows.com. The world runs on spreadsheets. You probably have a tab open with a spreadsheet right now, but the spreadsheet product you're using today was designed decades ago and it shows. They live in silos away from your business data. They weren't made to be used on a phone, and if you want to do even the simplest automation, you have to figure out complex scripts that are a nightmare to maintain. Rows is different. It combines a modern spreadsheet editor, data integrations with APIs and your business tools, and a slick sharing experience that turns any spreadsheet into a beautiful interactive website that you'll be proud to share. If you're writing a report on a growth experiment, you can use Rows to do your analysis on data straight from Bitquery or Snowflake. If you're deep diving on marketing, you can import reports straight from Google Analytics, Facebook Ads, or Twitter.

(00:36:52):
Or if you're working with sales, you can natively plug Stripe, Salesforce, or HubSpot directly into Rows. When you're done, you can share your work as a beautiful spreadsheet that's easy to read and embed charts, tables, and calculators into Notion, Confluence, or anywhere on the web. I've already moved some of my favorite spreadsheet templates to Rows. Go to rows.com/lenny to check them out. That's rows.com/lenny.

(00:37:17):
Okay, so let's shift to actually, how do you actually do this? How do you actually build a system of product-led sales? I feel like there's maybe three buckets. There's, what data do you need? What infrastructure systems do you need in place? Then, what are the people you need in place and how do you resource it? Maybe let's start with the data. What sort of data do you need in order to do this well?

Elena Verna (00:37:36):
There's different levels of scale on how you should be attacking this problem. First of all, it starts with just top-down intuition. What are the signals that you're seeing around the accounts that are highly correlative to sales being very excited-

Lenny (00:37:56):
Hmm.

Elena Verna (00:37:56):
... about this hand-raiser or about the sales form submit out of the usage? You just start with that. It's as simple as, how many of others are exhibiting those signals? When you have very low lead volume still, you don't want to get too complicated with it at the beginning. You want to be very transparent. You want to just understand what sales are seeing, what they get excited about, and feed them as many accounts that fit that model. The one thing is not to do is just to start sending every single user to sales because that's the fastest way for sales to say, "This product channel is garbage and I don't ever want to see a lead from it again." They have such close rates and their quota, their salary depends on their ability to close that they just start disregarding this as a meaningful channel. 

(00:38:42):
Now, the second escalation to it is, okay, now you will know intuition, but now let's actually look at the reality of who is hand-raising in the product. You look at the signal of who looks like a hand-raiser, smells like a hand-raiser, acts like a hand-raiser, but is not hand-raising. That's a maybe very simple regression model. It might be just a simple histogram analysis that you do of what differentiates people that are hand-raising from people that are not hand-raising and who else fits into criteria and looks like a hand-raiser based on those differences.

(00:39:18):
That should be your first PQA model. It should be very simple. It should just be if you can run a linear regression against some of the top coefficient that you notice so you know which has the biggest weight to predictability and you go with that. The main piece here is to involve sales very early on so you're partnering with them. You are not just dumping it on them and that you have a very strong feedback cycles from sales or whether what you've identified is correct or not correct because PQA definitions should not be static. They're constantly evolving. Just because it's right right now, that doesn't mean it's going to be right next quarter, so you have to have a lot of rituals with sales team to gather that feedback.

Lenny (00:40:03):
One thing I'll mention is Amplitude and Mixpanel both have a regression tool that help you identify correlations and causal kind of connections between metrics, so maybe shout-out there. I think it's called Compass-

Elena Verna (00:40:15):
Yep.

Lenny (00:40:16):
... and then Mixpanel's I think is called Signal.

Elena Verna (00:40:19):
Yep. Honestly, to be fair, most of the time I've done it manually at first because it requires so much understanding of the data, and if the data is correct and if I'm even seeing because you don't want to throw in too many co-related variables into the model because then you have issues of those variables like describing themselves, so to speak. Even if they're firing, there might not be actual predictive. It's partnership with analytics team and it's partnership with the intuition from the sales team. Then, you can start throwing it into a regression model and start to automate and think about scaling it, which there is a lot of PLS platforms that are coming up and finding their product-market fit at the moment that can do that for you.

(00:41:04):
I don't know if I would start there right from the beginning unless you actually understand the data because buying a platform will not bridge the gap for you understanding what actually matters in your data. Buying a platform or using a third-party solution will help you scale your efforts once you hit the first first, let's say, data sales fit that you can then scale and disincrease distribution of. 

Lenny (00:41:30):
Data sales fit. Wow, that's a new term. There we go. I have not heard that before. Data sales fit. I love it, so you're saying basically start manually to make sure you fully understand what's going on?

Elena Verna (00:41:41):
That's my take. Yeah. I-

Lenny (00:41:42):
[inaudible 00:41:42].

Elena Verna (00:41:42):
... just... I don't... I have a hard time scaling something that I don't fully understand because data can tell you lies and you can just fit any story that you want into data. I need to really understand it and how it fits and what you are observing and that it makes sense before you go and start using automation on it.

Lenny (00:42:00):
Cool. Okay, and then just one last question on what you were just talking about, which is finding correlations and causal relationships between usage and users and understanding who to send to sales. What are some common metrics and attributes that you've found that are indicative of they should go to sales?

Elena Verna (00:42:17):
One of the most important things is to create network effects within the company, within a team, which each additional team member added to an account benefits from everybody else. This does not mean you have to have platform network effects. You're not trying to be LinkedIn. You're not trying to be Instagram. Those are platform network effects. What you are trying to create is the value of each additional user into account. What that means, I'm going to go through slight deviation here is that there should not be only pulling mechanism where I pull you into my account. There also should be pushing mechanism. Any new sign-up that happens from the company that already has an account in my system should be presented with an option to join that account, not just create a brand new account.

(00:43:06):
What you don't want to create is hundreds of rogue individual accounts that don't know about each other. We as humans, we are creatures of community, we're creatures of we like to be surrounded by people, to be validated by people, and at least you want to create that herd mentality inside of the company and push and pull people into the account. One of the biggest PQAs is number of users in the company using your product. By the way, the magic number is usually seven. The more time you have seven or more users in the company and there's like some weird parallel here to seven friends at Facebook and seven collections at LinkedIn, but seven I've seen very often as a check mark. "Hey, there's enough value here distributed across multiple people inside the company that there might be an enterprise conversation to be had."

(00:44:00):
The second-most important is usually some sort of volume threshold. For example, for Amplitude, it's number of events that you're sending through, which means that you are really starting to tackle your entire application with analytics as opposed to just a small portion. Or with Miro, it was number of boards that you have in the account. With Figma, I think it's number of revisions that you have on any given design. The last one I would say is velocity. Velocity is the trickiest one just because we don't have a very easy way to measure velocity in our transactional data, but it's actually one of the most powerful one that triggers the right timing for the involvement because the change in velocity either number of users being added or events being sent or storage that is being utilized is usually a fantastic predictor. 

Lenny (00:44:54):
Amazing. Okay, so kind of like the simplest model to tell you there's a peak-y way is number of users usage and velocity.

Elena Verna (00:45:04):
Yep-

Lenny (00:45:05):
Amazing.

Elena Verna (00:45:05):
... and users, by the way, can be either usage of velocity metric, too. It's just like if you're going to do anything, just look at whichever accounts have most users. It's like an 80-20 rule. For 20% of the efforts, you're probably going to get 80% of the value. 

Lenny (00:45:19):
Love it. Okay, so I took us off track and you were talking about what data you may need in place. Is there anything else along those lines?

Elena Verna (00:45:25):
I would say that it's very important to identify behavioral signals as well, and I'll give an example. At Miro, we had a very strong behavioral signal that if there is an admin switch in the account, some sort of evaluation is happening. Admin transfer, new admin being assigned, that should be ding, ding, ding, all of the bells are ringing that you should maybe reach out to that person and see what's going on. The other one that is fascinating is your terms of use pages, your privacy and policy. Nobody cares about it unless they're considering enterprise deal. If you see anybody from account land on your terms of use pages, reach out to that person. More likely than not, you have a buyer on the hook and you can assist them in increasing their perceived value.

Lenny (00:46:19):
Wow, that is so interesting. That's the kind of stuff you only learn having done it.

Elena Verna (00:46:25):
Many, many times, yes, but those-

Lenny (00:46:25):
Oh.

Elena Verna (00:46:26):
... signals are, by the way, universal. We looked at it at MongoDB, it was very much true, so these things of when you... What in product constitutes evaluation process? What are the enterprise buyers are looking for? I wouldn't say, by the way, watching a webinar or landing on an enterprise landing page is a good behavioral signal because it might be annoying that I just like on accident landed on a landing page and now I'm being spammed by outbound SDR sequence. More meaningful actions that are deeper with an engagement user journey are incredible predictors.

Lenny (00:46:59):
You talked again about this idea of spamming from sales and it made me think about like... I don't even know if I want to ask this, but have you seen downside to sales just continuing to hammer you as a potential user? Does that actually hurt? I don't want to know almost because I feel like the answer is no, but what do you think?

Elena Verna (00:47:15):
I think you have to look at the channel effectiveness. You have only so many channels to communicate with a customer. Email is obvious. You can communicate with them in app. You can have some sort of chatbot. Maybe you can deploy some sort of paid marketing, maybe social or retargeting display ads, but those are very expensive to utilize. Stepping back and thinking when it's the right time to reach out. How can I grab their attention? If you highly saturated the channel that is your primary for reaching out to the user, they're not going to react even if it's more of a right time for them to react.

(00:47:59):
Will it hurt you? I don't think you'll notice it right away, but over time I think people become blind to channel communication if it's not applicable to them because, "Fool me once, shame on you." Like, "Fine, you tricked me to opening this email." Fool me twice, it's shame on me and I'll be a lot more frugal of which emails I open or which notifications I react to. I think that you have to put user journey first and you have to really think about the timing that it's right for user and PQA.

(00:48:34):
All it is is the right time to engage with the customer and then go hit them hard over all of the channels of communication, but then, also know that accounts go in and out out of PQA. Today I might be in the PQA, next week I might not be, so you need to sunset the efforts if you didn't get in touch with the customer and wait for the next PQA moment. It will happen if your product is holding that goal and is accountable for getting more and more accounts to reach a threshold PQA.

Lenny (00:49:07):
Wow, that's really interesting. I'm also happy to hear that answer. Great. Okay, so let's continue down this track of what it takes to implement a product-led sales motion. Just talked about the data component. What about just systems and infrastructure and tooling? What do you recommend there as a start?

Elena Verna (00:49:23):
I approach the subject always as an evolution, not a revolution, so start with your existing systems as much as possible. I would say the biggest mistakes to avoid if your sales team is very heavily embedded into Salesforce, don't try to have them switch to a different solution. It's just not going to work. You need to try to figure out how to embed what you need the data into Salesforce, not get them to use some other third-party tool. Then, I wouldn't jump into any big commitments until I really prove out viability of product-led sales motion before automating any of it. I'm more of kind of Wizard of Oz it as fast as much as possible to get the initial traction so then we can validate that there is investment to be had in scaling it and there's a business value in it.

Lenny (00:50:14):
The tools you're using at that point, is it like Google Sheets? Or is there something else involved in [inaudible 00:50:17]-

Elena Verna (00:50:17):
It's-

Lenny (00:50:18):
... [inaudible 00:50:18]?

Elena Verna (00:50:18):
... Google Sheets, it's your Looker, Tableau dashboards, it's your Amplitude charts and reports. It can be widgets within Salesforce or ETLs that you pipe through HubSpot and Marketos into Salesforce, or it can be CRM solutions for PLG specifically that you literally deliver in Excel sheets to sales team to prototype a different outreach.

Lenny (00:50:41):
Have you shared any of this kind of like MVP product-led sales stack that you recommend? If not, I think you should because that seems pretty useful.

Elena Verna (00:50:54):
Yeah, I think I definitely should. 

Lenny (00:50:54):
All right, there we go.

Elena Verna (00:50:54):
I have my idea for a next blog post. Done.

Lenny (00:50:54):
There we go. Okay. If we got anything out of this chat, we've got that. Okay, in terms of people, so we talked about data, we talked about tooling, infrastructure, what do you suggest in terms of people and resources to invest in this area as a start, and then also as you evolve?

Elena Verna (00:51:09):
For PLS, the people that you need is product managers that will be able to get account to PQA stage. You will need salespeople that will understand which usage triggered PQA and how to apply that information to find a buyer and to enable a buyer to convert them to an opportunity. You need marketing to educate both the end user or enterprise buyer on why the value of this enterprise solution is going to make sense to you, and you need analytics team. You need a data analyst that will continuously dig in the data to find correlative signals that you can test causation in. Those are the four people that you need, product, analytics, marketing, sale. I should say engineering, too, obviously, but I'm kind of bundling them together with product, 

(00:52:05):
Now, it's an evolution, not a revolution, so if you're starting from sales-led growth, I would highly suggest of you going to a sales team and asking for somebody to run a pilot with you. Don't just throw these leads into the top-down sales process and assume that everything is going to be just fine. Attach to yourself a pilot AE, so account executive, or an SDR and see how that works. You kind of separate yourself from the mothership of the sales engine and you actually prototype this separately in a little bit of a vacuum, not under pressure of them top-down quota relief. If you in a product-led growth company, then I would suggest do your own sales. It's kind of like a founder-led growth, so think about it like, "Hey, you need to close maybe first couple of deals you sell first so you truly understand what's happening," and would not get first hand-raisers and say, "Oh, we can't close it unless we have a salesperson." 

(00:53:01):
No, just have somebody support to do it. Have somebody on finance do it. You do it. I've been on chat myself plenty of times trying to close the deals just to understand what's the sales process for the customers looks like. Then, you can figure out who to actually hire and who to actually scale, but for PLS that starts in PLG, you actually just start with more of blend of an SZR and AE together because you don't need two separations. The same person can both outbound to a customer and close them at the same time, and then you can go into specialization of the role. Start small, start nimble, prove it out, scale along the way, but have marketing and analytics support you the entire journey.

Lenny (00:53:41):
That is really simple. What I'm hearing is you don't need to hire someone new necessarily. You have the resources most likely, and then it's just, how do you allot some time of this team to start investing and violating?

Elena Verna (00:53:54):
Yeah, I'd say that my philosophy is that I want to have an ROI for a new hire before putting a job rec out there, and to create an ROI, I need to prove it out of what potential can there be myself first. I can almost like fund this hire with the revenue that we can generate out of this channel originally. Obviously that includes a lot of individual contributor work that you have to do in the area potentially that is not comfortable, but that's the fastest way to grow in your career, so I think that's a necessary step for a successful execution.

Lenny (00:54:29):
You want to hear a crazy stat about product-led growth and not hiring sales?

Elena Verna (00:54:34):
Sure.

Lenny (00:54:37):
Okay, great. I was chatting with the founder of Notion for the series I'm working on and Notion didn't hire their first salesperson until they were past 10 million ARR.

Elena Verna (00:54:47):
I believe it. Miro did not hire their first salesperson until they were like 5 or 7 million in ARR. They were literally closing the contracts through support team and it was just fine.

Lenny (00:54:58):
Same with Notion, it was their customer success and support team.

Elena Verna (00:54:58):
Yep.

Lenny (00:55:00):
That is some product-led growth right there.

Elena Verna (00:55:02):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:55:04):
I love it. Amazing. Okay, so we've talked about data, tooling, people. Is there anything else that you find is really important to being successful with rolling out a product-led sales bridge motion?

Elena Verna (00:55:19):
The most important thing in product-led sales is that there is a different configuration internally of collaboration that needs to occur. In traditional sales world, marketing creates pipeline for sales. Sales sells product. Product engages with a paid user to drive retention. In the product-led sales, product acquires and activates a customer and product creates pipeline for sales. Relationship is not that there's a go-to-market org with marketing and sales, and product just kind of throws features across the fence for them to sell. 

(00:55:59):
The collaboration here is between product and sales, but that means the product has to take on accountability over pipeline. The worst thing that you can do is to say, "I'm going to do product-led growth," or, "I'm going to do product-led sales and I'm going to do it in marketing." Recipe for disaster. You'll be failure mode within six months because product has to take accountability over selling of the product itself. That is not to be taken lightly because so many product teams are deeply, deeply uncomfortable with owning monetization targets. Now, I'm not saying that product should just be gold and revenue because that's a very short-term short outcome past performance. There has to be a very clear designation onto long-term goals and long-term objectives and revenue ownership.

(00:56:52):
By revenue ownership, I don't mean that individual product manager also should have a revenue target on their back. What I mean is that the product leadership should be accountable for the revenue target, but the product people should be responsible for more of KPIs, free to paid conversion rate, package mix, PQA, maybe even PQLs, but those are all of the KPIs into revenue. The piece to me that is of utmost importance is to keep product accountable. You cannot start this product-led stales motion in marketing and sales and think that it can continue with the same configuration inside the company and still succeed. Product has to have a seat at the table and product has to feel accountable and responsible for it. 

Lenny (00:57:36):
When you say accountable, what does that actually look like? Is it like their OKRs have certain goals around, "Here's how many PQAs you're driving?" Is it a number? What does accountable mean in this-

Elena Verna (00:57:46):
I think so. Every product has some sort of goals and they definitely should have goals on keeping healthy, engaged user base. They should definitely have goals in terms of maybe feature utilization or customer satisfaction, but what I'm saying is to have also some sort of monetization goals. What that is for each company, I think, differs depending on their level of comfort and how close they are to revenue capture mechanism. Let's say at Miro, our head of growth product had a self-serve revenue target on her back. She drove it. She had revenue goal that she had to hit in product and she shared marketing because I ran marketing in that company. We shared a pipeline goal creation because pipeline cannot be created without marketing, too.

(00:58:33):
Marketing will need to educate. Marketing will need to find the buyer. Marketing will need to do accounts-based marketing in order to attract the buyer and connect it with the usage. Product and marketing now pull together to create the pipeline and give it to sales, but product can no longer sit on this island as a feature factory. It only works with the top-down sales organizations, which, as I said, I think are going to be heavily disrupted over the next 10 years with value-first product-led growth.

Lenny (00:59:04):
This is another hilarious meme that you shared on your LinkedIn, so another reminder, go check out Elena's LinkedIn with this hilarious meme of product teams being presented, "Hey, you're going to own some revenue targets." They're like, "Oh no." Yeah, exactly.

Elena Verna (00:59:21):
It's actually super interesting because a lot of growth leaders shy away from revenue targets. Acquisition target, sure. Retention target, engagement target, sure, but monetary target, "Oh no. How can I possibly own a revenue target?" I think we all in tech, and I specifically point a finger at my industry in B2B industry, just got a little bit complacent with revenue ownership from product side. I do think it's catastrophic for us in the long term if we don't fix it.

Lenny (00:59:48):
I love it. I want to do a whole podcast on your meme strategy and your parodies that you put out, but we'll stay on track here. In terms of the revenue target, what is that goal like? Is it just in this quarter X million dollars of revenue? Is it a growth rate from quarter over quarter? How do you find people actually define that revenue target?

Elena Verna (01:00:11):
Right, so there's different targets that you would have for self-serve revenue versus product-led sales revenue. For self-serve revenue, your KPIs should absolutely be free to paid conversion rates or trial to paid conversion rate. It's the package mix, it's the average revenue per user or ARPU. It may be retention rates, first-term retention rate, second-term retention rate in order for you to sustain the healthy revenue. That's what outputs self-serve revenue. Those should be the pieces. Do I have a problem in friction and acquiring new paid user in maximizing their value or in retaining that paid user? Those are the three inputs that go into self-serve ARR targets, and you should just understand where the biggest opportunity for your team to focus on driving it.

(01:00:56):
In any of those cases, most of the time free to pay conversion is the biggest focus of any given team just because we want to better convert and inflow into our user base, assuming we have good product-market fit so we have a solid retention happening. In free to pay conversion, there's three pillars that you constantly need to work on, and one pillar dominates them all. It's monetization awareness. Simple as that. If you have a freemium product, I guarantee you 75% of your customers in freemium product are not aware of what you're selling. Only focusing on monetization awareness can give you incredible output on driving monetization, and it's really it's product's ability to communicate via feature walls, via usage walls, via trials, or what the value of the paid offering is. 

(01:01:50):
I've heard stories from Slack of just showing message limits and how big of an improvement on conversion rate it had. I've had it firsthand at SurveyMonkey where just adding consistent EUI across all of the paid triggers that were that Amazon gold color and making sure that each user has been able to see at least three of them. There's a rule of three that goes into advertising that we need to see things three times in order to remember them that drove monetization awareness and conversion rate up, but that's basically consumers 80% of your work. The second one is just conversion rate optimization, so your pricing page optimization, your checkout page optimization, your currencies that you offer, the payment methods that you offer to make sure that there's as little friction as possible in order to actually pay.

(01:02:39):
Then, the last one is what you're selling, do people want to buy? This is where you actually go after monetization model change. Which features are in each plan? What are the price points in each plan? How did the upgrade path look like? Do you have add-on strategy? DO you have just pay-to-pay fee monetization plan strategy? That one is like the last one that you should cross because it involves a lot of cross-functional effort and decision-making, but free to paid conversion, upsell potential, and retention. That's for self-serve AR. For product-led sales, what product should own is PQA, but who defines PQA? That's the big question.

(01:03:19):
Who iterates on PQA? Then, how do you actually get people to get to the PQA stage? Just like product often will own engagement metric or maybe even activation target, your own PQA target, so that just becomes one of the goals. Depending on where the biggest effort that needs to be, it can be an activation, it can be engagement in PPPQA, but more and more I see product-led, especially mature companies needing to focus their product teams on PQQ, yet they don't have a clear definition because sales kind of goes rogue and does their own thing. Product fails to deliver predictable pipeline to sales, which pushes sales into a top-down motion prematurely.

Lenny (01:04:05):
A PQA target would be like 1,000 PQAs at this quarter. Is that the way you-

Elena Verna (01:04:06):
Yeah, yeah, so you usually actually look at it almost from conversion rate. You look at, "Okay, how many teams do I have in my ICP, so ideal customer profile segment, that are active?" That's my denominator, and how many of those teams are reaching PQA target-

Lenny (01:04:22):
Mm-hmm.

Elena Verna (01:04:23):
... this month? It's like a conversion rate to PQA out of engaged ICP teams.

Lenny (01:04:28):
One thing that I love that you've touched on is this awareness of monetization.

Elena Verna (01:04:33):
Yeah. 

Lenny (01:04:34):
People knowing that you have more features and that you may get access to more if you pay. How do you track that? Is it just like people seeing it per account or per user, like what percentage of seeing one of these upsells or seeing them three times?

Elena Verna (01:04:44):
I track it fairly simple two ways, one, qualitatively. I just run surveys against people and say, "Do you know what we're selling?" It's shocking how many just have no idea what's in our paid plans. Like we have major issue here, or I just track pricing page views per activated account. How many of the activated accounts landed on the pricing page at least once? That's at least a level of exposure that they hit some sort of trigger that pulled them to explore a pricing page. One of the things that just want to give a hint to anybody who's listening from a sales top-down companies, one issue you might have is that when your products is developing functionality, especially paid functionality, they just design review it and ship it for paid plans only. 

(01:05:34):
If I'm in the free plan or in the lower tier plan, I don't even see it. I don't even know of it existence because it doesn't exist in the app because it was never designed for me to even see it. Just doing one small change of pushing your design reviews to review functionality from every single state of the customer, free state, lower paid state, and target state that this functionality is actually unlocked can do all of the difference in the world. Then, you'll actually understand how that [inaudible 01:06:06] functionality is being exposed to a free user, so them to become aware in self-serve manner of its existence.

Lenny (01:06:15):
I love, love, love all these little tactical little insights and tips, so thanks for sharing all these little things that end up being the most useful to people. Just a few more questions and then I'll let you go. One is around pitfalls. What have you found are the most common pitfalls that startups run into as they're trying to invest in product-led sales? You touched on a few, but what comes to mind when I ask you that?

Elena Verna (01:06:39):
Let's just go through some summary that we've mentioned already throughout our conversation. Don't treat PLS as a traditional top-down sales process. Every single user does not equal. It's a opportunity for you to co-chase after. You need to understand the right triggers and usage. They can help you automate qualification process, so it's almost automating some of the SDR efforts to say, "When is the right time for my sales, for my human that I'm paying a lot of money, to intervene into this account and add value?" 

(01:07:13):
Sales interaction has to add value to user journey, not be disruptive or create additional friction because I've seen so many, even people posting of like, "Why am I getting a phone call 10 minutes later" It's annoying. I'm going to stop using the product because of it." They feel misunderstood. For that profile. Your customers understand whether you have buyers, whether you have users, and they're in your ICP segment. Know this information upfront so you can serve a best experience possible. 

(01:07:44):
Number two, hold your product accountable. This cannot be just executed through marketing and sales. Product has to have a seat at the table and product and sales relationship has to be one of the closest ones in this motion. That's really hard to change, especially in the traditional top-down sales company where marketing and sales have closer relationship. Try to create new rituals. Try to create the new ways of communication between the teams for them to be aligned behind the same goals.

(01:08:16):
Number three, don't leave marketing out of the equation. Majority of your usage will not have a buyer in it. You will need marketing, your enterprise marketing, your account-based marketing to go and find and hunt that buyer and to bring them and connect them with usage. Lean on your marketing team. Just because you're doing product-led growth and product-led sales does not mean you don't need marketing, and strong product marketer can do wonders here in helping you with messaging, with outreach, and sales enablement materials.

(01:08:48):
Number three, don't wait on data efficacy too long. You might be using your intuition at the beginning very well, but start thinking about how you will need to scale your data issues because product-led sales is all about leveraging usage for pipeline creation. You need to be able to measure that usage, understand that usage, track it, and evolve it.

Lenny (01:09:15):
Amazing. Two more things. One is you shared before we started chatting that you have some benchmarks around some of these metrics that you've mentioned of just what is good so that people can understand what their goals might be. What can you share there?

Elena Verna (01:09:29):
Yes, so in terms of benchmarks, first of all, it's time to get from individual usage, when that user comes in to have a single job to be done, to creating an enterprise-level contract. It does not happen in hours. It does not happen in days. It doesn't even happen in months of usage. A couple of benchmarks for y'all across Netlify, Miro, or Amplitude, which are all of the companies I worked at. It was 12 months plus of usage that had to happen before sales contracts can be created on sustainable way.

(01:10:02):
Now, that's not an all-encompassing rule. You will have very high-intent buyers coming in sometimes and you'll be able to close them within a week, but on average it takes a year of usage to escalate the problem from individual to a company-level solution. It takes time, be patient. This is not the problem of get more sign-ups this quarter and close more pipeline in the same quarter. This says you building for long-term growth and you closing contracts and the sign-ups that happened really last year in the best case scenario. 

(01:10:36):
Number two is don't confuse user and buyer. Please, please, please profile your users upon sign-up. Do not skip those onboarding questions. No, they do not detract for your onboarding completion rates and people that do drop off in the profiling stage, they were low intent anyways. They were never going to be activating if one extra question deterred them from completing, from continuing with your product. Profile your people, know who you're talking to. It's more important than a couple percentage drop-off that will never going to activate in the first place. No, no, no die user please because all of us-

Lenny (01:10:36):
I like that.

Elena Verna (01:11:18):
... are tired of receiving outbound that is not relevant to us. Then, the third one is conversion. Conversion rates here actually stand from the true PLG companies, so freemium conversion rate is usually around 5%, trial conversions are more closer to 10 to 15%, but your contract value start to go up.

(01:11:40):
It's not so much that you increasing conversion rates because a lot of those companies will still go through self-serve monetization flow before they become your sales pipeline prospects. Conversion rates stay the same, but your contract values and your lifetime value of the customer is what starts to increasingly go up and that you can influx into creating a smile revenue curve.

Lenny (01:12:03):
Incredible. The question you had about profiling your user, I was going to ask what questions to ask. I'm guessing maybe a better approach is just go to Miro or Amplitude and just go through the sign-in flow and see what they're asking.

Elena Verna (01:12:13):
Yeah, I would give some couple parameters in place. Number one, limited to maybe three to four screens because otherwise it starts to feel too long. Make sure they only ask information that you either going to use in the data segmentation that then you can escalate to personalization and messaging, but at least that you're going to use on data segmentation and experiment with how deep of an information that you can ask. 

(01:12:36):
You should always be able to ask about company size, about the department, which customers coming from, about their seniority on the team and about their use case. Those four questions are uniform. Everybody's used to answering them. The rest like phone number or some... maybe if you need to know the address or so on, those experiments, how much you actually want to make them required questions versus optional, but please, please, please experiment on your onboarding questionnaires. All of you.

Lenny (01:13:08):
Closing question. Everyone started with sales, sales-led growth. and then product-led growth emerged and now there's this bridge between the two of sales-led growth. Feels like there's always this new way of growing a business and approaching go-to-market. Is there something beyond product-led sales? What's next, if anything?

Elena Verna (01:13:27):
Well, I wonder how much a rise in AI is going to automate some of those sales conversations. It's not going to be truly product-led growth because-

Lenny (01:13:27):
No shit.

Elena Verna (01:13:37):
... it's not like just the product's it's going to sell itself. What if on the other side of that chat or other side of that email or even a Zoom call because they can do a deep fake of anybody, it's going to be AI selling to you and giving you very deep and personalized answers? I am curious to see how that's going to evolve because the plethora of information that AI can surface to you in a very personalized manner in a matter of seconds is far stronger than any human or even content management system can do at the moment.

Lenny (01:14:12):
Do you want to coin an acronym right now for what that might be?

Elena Verna (01:14:16):
Have to be AI sales.

Lenny (01:14:19):
A-I-S-L-

Elena Verna (01:14:22):
There I go. 

Lenny (01:14:23):
... G. Wow, it's a mouthful. Elena, this was everything I was hoping it would be. I imagine this episode will be even more popular than your first one. Thank you so much for making time and getting into such detail in all the things we talked about. Two final questions. Where can folks find online if they want to reach out, learn more? How can listeners be useful to you?

Elena Verna (01:14:42):
I'm on LinkedIn a lot, but I have started my own Substack, so please subscribe to my newsletter if you can.

Lenny (01:14:47):
Definitely do.

Elena Verna (01:14:48):
I put more short content on LinkedIn and longer form explanations in my Substack, not to compete with your Lenny Newsletter-

Lenny (01:14:56):
No, there's-

Elena Verna (01:14:56):
... but these are-

Lenny (01:14:56):
... there's plenty of room for everyone. I recommend yours within Substack and we're going to link to it, and definitely there's like no reason not to subscribe if you're listening to this podcast. It's only upside. 

Elena Verna (01:15:07):
Well, thank you. We're also creating PLG course with Reforge that is going to go into very nitty-gritty details of everything that I'm talking about to help you operationalize these concepts. It's launching in fall-

Lenny (01:15:19):
Oh awesome.

Elena Verna (01:15:19):
... 2023-

Lenny (01:15:19):
Yeah.

Elena Verna (01:15:20):
... so do check that out. Other than that, I'm a really big believer in democratizing knowledge so we don't have to all make the same mistakes over and over again, so the biggest way that you can help me is to share your insight, share your knowledge, and share your learnings so we can all grow so much faster together. 

Lenny (01:15:37):
Well, you're one of the best at doing that, and thank you again for doing this. 

Elena Verna (01:15:41):
Thank you for having me, Lenny.

Lenny (01:15:42):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Elena Verna (00:00:00):
Growth is a fairly new field. You have a lot of renowned interest in growth hacks, like what is the sure things to get growth. In the age of social media everybody and anybody tries to share their tips and tricks. Oftentimes things that are completely out of context or they are very specific to one example and actually do not apply as a pattern.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:21):
We're going to start with growth tactics that never work. If you see these items on your roadmap, you should probably not do them. What's number one?

Elena Verna (00:00:26):
We live in tech. There's always lots of startups and startups obviously looking to grow. There is a huge misconception in the field that in order to get growth going, you need a growth team. To figure out your product market fit and how to distribute it, it's not something that you can outsource to somebody.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:42):
Powerful words. I'm loving this list already.

Elena Verna (00:00:45):
Number two, this was my favorite and it might be a little spicy. Never ever once have I seen a rebrand or redesign, especially of UK marketing site produce good performance results. New CMO comes in designing their website or designing the brand as if it was reflection of their personal taste, and oftentimes it's promised with our acquisition is going to go up and it never materializes into anything meaningful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:12):
A lot of contrary intakes here, I love this.

Elena Verna (00:01:14):
Number three, if every single one of your initiatives that you're doing on growth is an experiment that's a problem. It's almost like a disease, like a paralyzing disease.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:28):
Today my guest is Elena Verna, my first ever third time repeat guest. Elena is the smartest person that I know on B2B Growth. She's also hilarious. She's led growth at companies like Miro Amplitude, Dropbox, and SurveyMonkey. She's advised dozens of companies on growth including Superhuman, MongoDB, Netlify, Similarweb, Sanity, Maze, so many more. In our conversation, Elena shares 10 growth strategies and tactics that never work yet that she keeps seeing people and companies invest lots of resources into. She also covers her three favorite growth frameworks that help you wrap your head around how to think about growth, and she also does a short dive into the non-traditional career paths that we both went down. If you spend any time working on product growth or lead people or work with people working on growth, this episode is for you. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Elena Verna.

(00:02:32):
This episode is brought to you by Sinch the customer communications cloud. Here's the thing about digital customer communications, whether you're sending marketing campaigns, verification codes or account alerts, you need them to reach users reliably. That's where Sinch comes in. Over 150,000 businesses, including eight of the top 10 largest tech companies globally use Sinch's API to build messaging, email and calling into their products. And there's something big happening in messaging that product teams need to know about, Rich Communication Services or RCS, think of RCS as SMS 2.0. Instead of getting texts from a random number, your users will see your verified company name and logo without needing to download anything new. It's a more secure and branded experience, plus you get features like interactive carousels and suggested replies.

(00:03:22):
And here's why this matters. US carriers are starting to adopt RCS. Sinch is already helping major brands send RCS messages around the world and they're helping Lenny's podcast listeners get registered first before the rush hits the US market. Learn more and get started at sinch.com/Lenny. That's S-I-N-C-H.com/Lenny.

(00:03:45):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast, now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market-leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risks. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to Vanta.com/Lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/Lenny.

(00:04:40):
Elena, thank you so much for being here. Welcome back to the podcast, our first ever third-time repeat guest. What an honor Dancing if you're not watching on video. Thank you for being here. I was actually just looking at our first episode, which we recorded almost over two years ago, September of 2022, and someone just today left a comment. People are still finding and watching it, and this comment encapsulates why I love having you on this podcast. This person said, "Wow, every word from Elena encapsulates years of knowledge. This is one to digest, slowly go back to and put on repeat. Thanks for sharing your experience with the world"

Elena Verna (00:05:23):
Thank you for having me. And my north star metric is insights per minute. That's what I try to use whenever I have any live meetings with people so it squarely fits within what I'm optimizing for. That's great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:37):
That needs to be my KPI on this podcast, "Insights per minute."

Elena Verna (00:05:40):
I think you have it. I think your insights per minute is pretty high.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:44):
That is. I do shoot for that, although I have learned you also needed to feel good and feel their story. There's an interesting combo stuff. You can't just be insight, insight, insight.

Elena Verna (00:05:54):
It's all about how you present them too. Storytelling is a big portion of it actually to stick.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:00):
Already insight. That's an insight right there. There's two areas that I want to spend time on with you, and these are areas I know you've been thinking a lot about. One is growth tactics that never work, that people keep spending time on and waste their time on. And I know you have a nice list of things you've seen that just don't work that people keep trying. And then two is growth frameworks, your favorite growth frameworks to help people wrap their mind around how to think about growth and grow their product. We're going to start with growth tactics that never works. Maybe just frame what we're going to talk about, talk about what this list and collection of tactics that we're going to talk about is.

Elena Verna (00:06:36):
Growth is a fairly new field compared to marketing or product management or engineering. There's a lot of people that are now accumulated that have 10 years or so experience, but there's also a lot of newcomers and because there's ratio of actually newcomers, it's much higher than those people that have five, 10 years of experience of doing growth. You have a lot of renowned interest in growth hacks. What is the sure things to get growth? What is the sure thing to get that metric up? How can I contribute to success with the company the fastest way possible? All of these shortcuts and obviously in the age of social media where everybody and anybody tries to share their tips and tricks and this and that, people are grasping for oftentimes things that are completely out of context or they are very specific to one example and actually do not apply as a pattern or simply not even applicable to their type of business whatsoever.

(00:07:35):
There's just a lot of failure happening in growth teams. Actually, I think growth teams are becoming one of those departments that has a higher head of growth firing rate than even CMOs because people are coming in, there's a bunch of expectations, "Hey, you're ahead of growth or you are a growth pm or you're a growth marketer, you're supposed to drive growth." And when that growth does not happen, here comes the axe and people off they go and the recycle and cycle starts all over in order to populate those positions. I think that there's just a lot of misinformation I would say probably out there in terms of what growth actually is and how it should be done in the companies. And today I just want to cover some of the biggest ones that I see as a patterns as I'm advising companies, as I'm operating in companies because it's just so blatant yet there's very few pieces of information on this for people to learn from.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:31):
Amazing. What's number one?

Elena Verna (00:08:34):
Number one, I have to start with hiring. There's lots of positions open all the time. There's so many from head of growth to growth PM there's a lot of rotation, as I said that is happening in the field. Very few growth people actually stay in the job for over a year or two years. There's a lot of constant churn and constant rehiring. And when you doing hiring, there's a lot of mistakes that are actually happening in hiring that I just want to start off on the list. It's not a roadmap item, but oh my gosh, there's just so much fault that is happening here. And I did write about it on your blog of hiring for growth. There's a little bit of a reference to that and one of the biggest latent issues that I see is hiring too soon for growth.

(00:09:17):
We live in tech, there's always lots of startups. Startups are obviously looking to grow and there is a huge misconception in the shield that in order to get growth going, you need a growth team, absolutely not true. In order to get the growth going in the company, a founder and the founding team have to figure out how to make it grow to the first, let's say a million, 5 million, 10 million in ARR. Some of the companies don't even create growth teams until they're a hundred, 200 million in ARR because to figure out your product market fit and how to distribute it's not something that you can outsource to somebody. It's not somebody that with a shiny resume can come over and all of a sudden wave a magic wand and all of a sudden you have viral campaigns and a bunch of signups coming through and everybody's paying and everybody's retaining.

(00:10:09):
That just doesn't happen. I see that mistake happening a lot. I really believe that the founder led growth is not being popularized enough that you do not need growth teams until you actually can start running experiments on your user base, which means that you have volume of users that you can learn from and optimize and innovate on, and that first wave of growth has to be founder led.

(00:10:35):
And there's two specific reasons that I incur on, which is before you have growth team, before you would think about growth team first you need to have solid PMF, product market fit, means that you have a solution to a problem and you have customers not only coming in and solving that problem with your solution, but they're also retaining and staying with you. There is a good retention. You can use channel score of how many people would say that they cannot live without your product as well, but there's some sort of PMF. And then number two, you have data growth cannot function without data. If you have 10 users or 10 customers, that's not data, that's a G-sheet with your customers and you don't need a growth team for that. Until you have data that you can actually do an analysis and you can create hypotheses on and you can start applying experimentation, don't even think about growth team.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:32):
Just to summarize a few of the things you just said, just for folks, you basically have seen startups look for a head of growth to join and solve their growth problem and your insight there is just almost always that is not going to be the solution to your problem until you have strong retention already, have a really high score on the channel score if don't have a ton of data yet and party advice is just the founder should continue to do this for as long as possible. A million ARR is one milestone a lot of people recommend. To your point, a lot of companies wait lot longer.

Elena Verna (00:12:06):
Yes. And honestly, the longer you wait, the better it is because that way your entire company will be trained to be responsible for growth as opposed to putting this one island with a growth team and saying, "They're going to be growing," and what is the rest of the company doing? Honestly, the longer you wait, the better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:24):
As you talk about this, sales is a part of what you described here, like hiring your first sales person. And I guess how do you think about your first head of growth versus salesperson? Is there anything advice there is? Like for B2B SaaS, you probably don't hire head of growth for even longer, you hire sales first or what's your advice?

Elena Verna (00:12:42):
It depends on how you're actually going to collect the monies. If your money collection is going to happen through sales team primarily, then you absolutely should be hiring sales way before growth. In fact, in the sales led companies, growth teams are not necessarily needed even that much. You might have a growth marketing team, which is really a demand gen team that is rebranded for growth marketing so they can charge you 20 to 30% more in their salaries, but at the end of the day, sales is doing your monetization. They are doing your activation, they are doing your retention and success efforts. For sales like companies, yeah, higher sales, absolutely. Unless you're starting to do self-serve revenue.

(00:13:23):
You're trying to have product sell itself through potentially freemium acquisition, trial acquisition or you actually having product led activation, monetization, that's when you would need a growth person. If you're starting with self-serve monetization, growth hire should be frankly first before sales. Your sales are going to be more opportunistic in nature versus if you sales led company, go ahead, hire sales, wait for growth until you are ready to overlay product-led growth on top of your sales motion.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:57):
That's an excellent clarification. Basically what I'm hearing, the advice is hire your ahead of growth only when you have clear product market fit and you're a product-led company and beyond a millionaire ARR ideally something like that.

Elena Verna (00:14:11):
Right. And I won't say you're product-led company. You are relying on product-led motion to resolve a lot of the growth levers within you because you don't have to be fully product-led company. But if product, let's say acquires people, let's say with the SEO or SEM, and then its product is meant to activate them and then sales closes them, sales would be obviously important as well, but growth would have to come in a little bit sooner as well. If you have any product-led components where product is responsible for acquisition, activation, monetization or retention, that's where growth comes in.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:48):
We talked deeply about that specific topic in our first conversation, just for folks, want to go deeper there. There's lot there.

Elena Verna (00:14:53):
I need to bring it back. This is keeps happening.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:55):
I love that.

Elena Verna (00:14:55):
I need to repeat it. You need to repeat it three times right before it sticks to people. Hopefully this is the third time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:01):
Absolutely. I'm only saying that because people may be wanting more of what you're describing and I will point them to our first episode, which gives deep on that one topic.

Elena Verna (00:15:09):
Amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:10):
Excellent. Anything else before we move on to number two?

Elena Verna (00:15:13):
No, let's move on to number two.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:14):
Let's do it.

Elena Verna (00:15:16):
Number two, this is on the other side on the matured company where I see a trend over and over, and it's becoming even more prominent right now of when companies growth slows down, which inevitably happens for a lot of businesses, it happens for a variety of reasons. We're not going to go into the reasons as to why growth can be slowing down and then they hire a shiny growth head to fix the problem, to basically saying, "Our business is slowing down. We are on the decline. We're going to bring this person, or we're going to put this team together and our growth is going to accelerate." That just does not happen. If you have the overall business slowing down, your head of growth is destined to fail because the reason business is slowing down is much deeper than not having a growth team.

(00:16:03):
Growth team can optimize, growth can maybe lift it by 10, 15%. Maybe that's enough for you. Even that is on the upper end of what growth team will be able to do if there is a slow-down trajectory. But what's important is that if you have core product and core marketing issues, growth team will not be able to fix them for you. You're going to have to address the big elephant in the room as to why business is slowing down in the first place as opposed to just plopping a growth team on the issue and expecting them to do miracles while the rest of the business continues chugging on the same trajectory that caused the slowdown in the first place.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:41):
Wow, I've never heard this point before and it's such an important one and it's very related to your first point. Growth isn't going to build a product people want, they will help you grow it

Elena Verna (00:16:53):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:54):
If your business is slowing, your product market fit basically might be disappearing and growth isn't solving that problem.

Elena Verna (00:16:59):
Disappearing, it may be degrading, it may be being eaten by a competitor because there's somebody that is stomping on your territory. The point is growth can amplify great product market fit and growth can help you grow faster once you are already growing. But if you are slowing down and you have issues with either your go-to-market strategy or your core product strategy with your core product market fit, growth is going to be absolutely helpless to do anything. And it's honestly, it's a huge waste of money because at those size of the companies, you would make fairly large growth teams in order to tackle every single product flow and interface that is already out there and invented.

(00:17:45):
It's a huge expense. ROI on it, maybe at least one to one. What you put into it, you might get that much out of it, but it's not going to be enough to create a J curve of the reacceleration by just relying on growth team. I think it's just like this is where the name growth team plays against it because, "We're looking for growth. Do you have a growth team?" No. I don't have a better idea by the way how to name it, but this is where I think it's misunderstood that there's the silver bullet of a perfect head of growth, perfect growth team that can reverse the trajectory of the business.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:26):
Then for folks that are thinking about, "Wow, maybe I should be hiring head of growth," when should you hire head of growth? When you're an established company,

Elena Verna (00:18:33):
If you are declining in your revenue growth or whatever other metric that you're looking at, your weekly active users or whatnot, see at least that you're able to plateau it so you can stop the decline. There is already a visible trajectory that your core product and your core marketing teams are able to at least reverse the degradation of the metrics. Ideally, you would even start to see some immediate signs of life that there is potential in the business, in the pockets, and then you can put growth into it to really blow it up to the full extent. But if you are on a decline, just don't do it because there's going to be very disappointing results in the year or so.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:18):
Awesome. Great one, let's move on. Number three.

Elena Verna (00:19:23):
Number three, this is my favorite, and it might be a little spicy because if there's any marketers listening out here, but doing rebrand more specifically, homepage redesign to drive growth. This is what hurts me so much and I've lived through so many of these and never ever once have I seen a rebrand or redesign, especially a UK marketing site, produce good performance results. Now, there's many reasons as to why you might want to do a rebrand, why you might want to design your marketing site because you're trying to enter a new market, new category, your product has evolved and you need to do a full update. But those are almost like it's a logging indicator that something needs to change and you're changing it and then you know that you're going to have to optimize the hell out of it in order to actually bring it even to the previous performance results.

(00:20:22):
It's like a stepping stone back, but there is a much bigger room for upside that you can get to, but you are going to have to work to get to that upside. But yet so many companies, there's a story that happens all the time. I hire a new CMO, new CMO comes in, they're like, "What's inside my house here? My house is not designed to my liking. Let me repaint these walls. I want this shade of blue. Let me put the couches over here." And they start almost designing their website or designing the brand as if it was reflection of their personal taste. And oftentimes it's promised with our acquisition is going to go up, our category penetration is going to go up, our education or awareness is going to go up.

(00:21:10):
And it never materializes into anything meaningful because again, if you're doing it as a step towards unlocking new global maxima, sure, I love that. Do it. Go after it. Know that you have a ton of work ahead of you in order to actually unlock that global maxima. But to ever promise a homepage redesign or marketing site redesign in order to drive more acquisition is a failed promise that is going to be led by lots of agency money spending, often a million dollars plus, lots of arguing about which shade of blue your brand color is going to be, and eight to 10 months at the minimum of development and very lackluster results afterwards.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:58):
Oh man, I'm loving this list already. This is great. To your point, it may still be worth doing if you're coming into it eyes wide open, this isn't going to drive growth, but we're setting ourselves up for a future brand that's world-class and we know our current brand stinks and our homepage needs to be refreshed. If you're aware, it's not going to drive growth, it might be okay.

Elena Verna (00:22:19):
Every single time I've seen a marketing site at least rebrand, it's been a step back in performance that then is being treated as a fire drill to fix. Just don't do it if you expect immediate results out of it, or at least educate the team on how long it's going to take to get to the point where you think that there's going to be upside away from your original brand.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:48):
I've experienced this not just with marketing sites, but most redesigns. Redesign of the product.

Elena Verna (00:22:53):
Product redesign. How much product and engineering work comes into just changing a logo in your product or changing colors? It's insane. With no results ever, there's no results.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:06):
And to your point, it's like, "We've spent six months redoing onboarding. Everything we've built builds on this new design and experience, we can't not launch it. Every team is working on this new world, we're just going to launch it and then we're going to claw back. We're going to figure out how to get it back." That's how it goes.

Elena Verna (00:23:26):
It's a new starting point and that starting point is going to be much lower than your current optimized experience that you have. Whether it's well optimized or not optimized, it doesn't matter. It's gone through some level of optimization versus rebrand is always a shot in the dark. It might be prettier, sure, but that doesn't mean it's going to perform well. Obviously never say never. Sometimes it might work, and if it worked for you, I am so glad. But that's an outlier and don't treat it as a pattern.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:57):
And I was just going to say, I think everyone listening to this that is working on something like this is probably thinking, "No, I think we have a good shot at this."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:00):
... is working on something like this is probably thinking, "No, I think we have a good shot at this. We've really thought deeply about this and it might actually be really positive." In your experience, it sounds like you've seen it work occasionally, or is it just never?

Elena Verna (00:24:15):
The best I've ever seen is that it produced net neutral results and it produced us better ability to optimize towards something bigger. That's the best case scenario. So if you're working on it, my biggest advice is not to say you stop. Just understand that the goal here is not to drive at launch, in the seven-day readout after launch, some increased performance.

(00:24:38):
The goal here should be, we will launch, we will probably see a hit, model out and forecast for a hit, and then give yourself two to three months at the minimum, ideally more like six months, to really optimize it back to a good standing where it can potentially outperform. But you need to bake in that three to six months of work after the launch, which is what a lot of companies and teams forget to do because they just move on. Because it's like big initiative, big pop, and off we go to our next project.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:08):
I love that we're only at number three. This is amazing. Let's do number four.

Elena Verna (00:25:13):
Okay. Number four is obsessing over your competition. Okay, so there's a little bit of a gotcha here. I tear down companies all the time. I have thousands of Gmail accounts that I sign up for any and every product. I go through their entire experience. I look at their monetization strategies. I look at their activation. I do it across direct competition of the company that I'm working with as well. I want to know what I'm playing against.

(00:25:45):
So knowing what your competition is doing is extremely important. Being inspired by some aspects of what your competition is doing in their experience is a wonderful place to originate an ideation or potentially try to implement into your product as well. But blatantly saying, "Hey, we're going to copy all of these best tactics or all of these flows because, hey, they're doing better than us. Let's just rip them and do exactly the same. Why isn't our onboarding looks the same as this onboarding? This company is so successful."

(00:26:20):
That's where things really go wrong because every single experience is very unique to their customer, to their channel. You don't even know if you're getting their actual experience or you use some tester cell or you're getting some personalized thing based on where you signed up from, who you said that you are. So you don't even know what actually the overall thing looks like most of the time and putting that into your product, it just leads to very subpar results. And there's a lot of drive, especially to have it as a shortcut. "Okay, we don't want to go through this ideation or user research. We don't want to do user interviews, but we don't want to do A/B testing. It works for them. It must work for us. Let's just go and do it." And it fails 95% of the time.

(00:27:08):
Now, there are certain pieces that I would rightly recommend. I already said inspiration. I use it for inspiration all the time. I'm like, "Okay, what's cool? What is everybody doing?" So because I want to just stay in the know on what other people are implementing and hopefully if it's in the control experience, it works and it worked better. I use web archives a ton for locked out pages too. I'm like, okay, how did it look last year? Why does their whole page look this way, or the pricing page? And I analyze that and I try to extrapolate some results.

(00:27:40):
I also think that there is a lot of patterns you start to notice as you start tearing down all of these companies. You're like, "Oh, these elements are always the same." That means all of these companies are arriving to these things and they seem to be winning elements. And you can take those elements and put them into your product, but you can never skip the ideation, the design, the user research, the customer interview, the experimentation step.

(00:28:04):
And you should always balance it with actually innovating yourself in your product. Because copying competition is like the fastest way to mediocrity because you'll never be a leader if you copied somebody else. Leader is by default is somebody that is able to separate themselves from the pack in something else. And if you are trying to just be, I don't know who is ever trying to be the mediocre middle of the pack, but maybe it's a good starting point, but never the end goal.

(00:28:37):
The only other thing that I'll say before I'll stop talking is benchmarks. Benchmarks are also very dangerous here to use because benchmarks are usually done on all of the competition, on all of the softwares out there. And the way people define numbers is so different from company to company. Even if you look as something as simple as signups. Okay, how many signups should you be on average getting? Or your conversion from prospecting visitor to a signup? Or from a signup to activated user? It's so depends on how do you define prospect visitor? Some companies define it as all traffic. Some define it as new traffic. Some of them define it on the new IP address, new persistent id. How Google analytics defines it. How Amplitude defines it.

(00:29:21):
So all of these definitions are so different. So taking also any benchmark that is derived from competition and saying, "This is where we should be," is also so dangerous because it might not even be applicable depending on how you define the metric. And one of the things that all of those benchmarking data fails is to actually look at specific definitions. And that's not to say that benchmarks are not extremely valuable data point in your decision making because it's an input that you should leverage to say what it could be possible. But to just blindly it and set it is just a sure way to fail any of your initiatives and efforts.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:04):
You're telling me that there's no shortcuts?

Elena Verna (00:30:10):
I wish there were. I mean, I've been doing this for over 15 years. If there were any shortcuts, I'd be all over them. There are patterns and there are frameworks, but there's no shortcuts.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:20):
So people hearing this, they're like, "Okay, don't copy the competition. Use it for inspiration." It's a little hard to know exactly the line between those two. Is there an example that you can think of where you took really interesting inspiration from someone and it worked for a company you're working with? Or you copied someone and it's just like, "Oh, that failed. That was a bad idea."

Elena Verna (00:30:41):
I use competition to understand the general framework of how people collect some information or resolve certain steps. So, for example, a sharing model so many products like, "Hey, can you share this with somebody?" Well, you can go and spend so much time of figuring out how it should look. Or you can go to Slack, you can go to Figma, you can go to Nero, you can go to Notion. Like, okay, Google, how are they doing sharing model? You can look at all of that and say, "Okay, here's all of the common elements that all of them have. Here's the pieces that I think will apply to my product. Here's things that do not, and here's what I can derive from it."

(00:31:19):
I use it as an input into ideation, but I never use it as a destination for the result, if that makes sense. Because it's very helpful to not start from scratch. The empty start problem is real and competition is a wonderful way to not have that and to have input into it, but never to just say, "Oh, we can skip the design cycle off we go," or, "Just slap our colors on it. If it works for them, it's going to work for us." So I have extensive Nero boards with everybody's onboarding flows, with everybody's pricing pages, their sharing model, their invite colleagues models that I reference all the time.

(00:32:00):
But they've never been the exact thing that I would use for any company as opposed to say, "Hey, I think this is a great starting point for you. Here are the things that I think will work very well for your company and for your product and take these elements. The rest you need to go and do themselves, so at least that way there's a starting point."

(00:32:22):
And this is why I also started doing a lot more of my own, almost, prototypes, like skeletons of here's the elements that you should do in these flows. I have one for pricing page, I have one for homepage, but you need to put in your own [inaudible 00:32:36] into it, in order for it to actually work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:39):
What made me realize this back in the day was thinking at Airbnb, especially, thinking about people looking at our flow and being like, they've got it all figured out. We're just going to copy what they've done, so thoughtful and have tested everything. And knowing how that has not happened and how so much of this was guesswork and we hate so much of it. Just thinking about people trying to copy this thinking we know what we're doing. It's like, "What are you guys even thinking?"

Elena Verna (00:33:02):
Oh my God, I actually had that happen to me. At Dropbox not so long ago, somebody reached out and they're like, "Oh, I looked." It was like some page on activation flow and they're like, "Oh, I love this page. This is so cool. I love what you've done here. I'm going to go take it to my company." I'm like, "We haven't touched it in 10 years. This page is only visible for small cohort of people. Please don't do it. Please don't copy it. It performs like shit. I know it's out there, but it's not meant to be out there. Nobody thoughtfully put it out there." So that's definitely a huge failure point that you can run into.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:42):
Right, if it's like a fancy company, assume they're just so smart and diligent about every little pixel and decision.

Elena Verna (00:33:48):
If people only knew of how much craziness is happening in those big companies and how much chaos there is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:57):
Oh man, that's a whole other podcast episode.

Elena Verna (00:33:59):
Whole other podcasts, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:00):
Okay, number five.

Elena Verna (00:34:02):
Okay, I have this one. It's a little bit Meta, but I see it happening all the time. We love to think that our problems are unique. I'm working in this company and we have this gross problem and we need to go and figure out the solution from the grounds up. Maybe this is a little bit related to the competition point, but I'm very sorry to break it to all of you, but your problem is not unique. I am 99% sure of that. Your problem has been felt by somebody somewhere in probably many, many places and you trying to re-engineer solution is time lost to market and has a huge opportunity cost.

(00:34:49):
So my biggest thing that I try to get people is don't think that you have unique problems. You don't. I know we love to. It'd be fun to have something unique to learn, but with so many startups, with so many people in our industry, in your industry, whichever industry that is, your problem has been solved by somebody. Or at least that there's a lot of failures on the problem that you should be learning from. And number one thing that whenever you have an initiative or whenever you have a metric that you need to go and move, to not start from scratch, ever. Do not start from scratch. It's the worst thing that you can do because you can waste so many cycles on trying to do something that probably has already been solved, which means how do you approach this as a result?

(00:35:41):
Well, you can look at competition and how they're solving the problem. That's one input, for sure. You should go find people that have solved this problem because there are people there and people love to talk about what they do. So take advantage of that human psychology and go find those people and just ask them, "How did you do it? What did you do? What happened?" Obviously, not all the time everybody's going to respond, but we have LinkedIn, we have X. Go out there, find the people that you think or ask around in your network of who you think might have similar solutions and just go talk to people. It would be incredible shortcut if you're talking about an actual hack that is a hack to get to an optimal solution.

(00:36:26):
And then the last thing that I would also say is that solving any one problem uniquely is extremely inefficient. We are evolving so fast in our market, you need to be able to patternize your solutions. Patternize, is that a word?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:43):
Let's make it a word.

Elena Verna (00:36:44):
Make patterns. Make patterns out of your solutions. So more you can stop looking at as a unique data point or unique problem and more as there is, I need to fit it into existing pattern or I need to figure out the framework on how to solve not only this problem but other problems. The faster you'll be able to get at least to like 60% of the solution there. And then you can do very authentic implementation of whatever you want to do. But to go from zero to 60 manually, as a one-off, we do not have time in the industry right now to do it, unless you want to be left behind.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:23):
Bam. Powerful words. Is there an example that comes to mind of you doing this either the wrong way of just thinking this was unique and realizing I should have talked to people, or where you actually realized something was not unique?

Elena Verna (00:37:37):
I'll give you actually an example that I had when I was at Nero. At Nero, we were first trying to stand up community, and I was tasked to do it, and I've never done it before. So I was banging my head around against the wall and I'm like, "Okay, how do I do it? What software do we use? Where do we acquire users? What kind of content is going to go in there?"

(00:38:02):
So I was approaching it almost like a finding product market fit, and I will fail so much doing it. And I honestly only have a year to get to some sort of traction before this is going to get shut down because company is impatient, company is moving fast. So if this is going to be a failure point, it's either going to be taken away from me, which is fair, or we is going to close the door on it, which would be a huge failure both on my point and for company as a whole.

(00:38:29):
So I went and I started talking to a bunch of people that have done communities, and I remember talking to Caroline from Atlassian who has stood up community. I actually hired her as an advisor afterwards and she's like, "Well, are you talking about a user community or an agency community or a partner community?" And I'm like, my mind was blown. I'm like, "I even considering all of these angles because I was just literally thinking about users only." And she's like, "Well, you shouldn't necessarily start with the user community. If you want some results out of it, go to agency or partner communities first." She would applying it to me in a structural way for me to grasp my head around it and then implement something that had much better results at the end that I wouldn't even gotten to probably until six, eight months later, if I didn't talk to her.

(00:39:19):
So I think it has to come with a place of knowing that you don't know everything and humility to say, "Hey, I need help," and I might have a already fancy title. At that point, I was an interim CMO at Nero and I'm like, "I don't know how to do this." And it actually earns you a lot more credit than you think. And a lot of people are afraid to admit that they don't know how to solve a problem and that's why they start from scratch. But you need to really put your ego aside and get some help faster than trying to hit every single failure point along the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:02):
And the thing that'll really hurt your ego is failing. And so the more you could do to avoid failing and being successful with this initiative by talking to people, doing research.

Elena Verna (00:40:12):
And to be fair, failure is going to be unavoidable. If you talk about growth, growth is about failure. My big motto, life motto on growth is that you have to fail to learn. You can't just constantly succeed. Success is an output of a lot of failures, but the question is, how much time do you have to fail? And a lot of times we don't realize how many failure cycles we're going to have to go through before we get a success, and that company, or even market, has no time for that. So still expect to fail, sure, but the timeline for failures is going to be shortened quite a bit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:54):
Okay, so we've gone halfway through your list. There's 10 items on this list, right?

Elena Verna (00:40:58):
Yes, yes. There's 10 items. Next one is a good one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:01):
I'm excited to chat with Christina Gilbert, the founder of OneSchema, one of our longtime podcast sponsors. Hi, Christina.

Christina Gilbert (00:41:08):
Yes. Thank you for having me on, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:10):
What is the latest with OneSchema? I know you now work with some of my favorite companies like Ramp, Vanta, Scale, and Watershed. I heard that you just launched a new product to help product teams import CSVs from especially tricky systems like ERPs.

Christina Gilbert (00:41:26):
Yes, so we just launched OneSchema file feeds, which allows you to build an integration with any system in 15 minutes as long as you can export a CSV to an SFTP folder. We see our customers all the time getting stuck with hacks and workarounds and the product teams that we work with don't have to turn down prospects because their systems are too hard to integrate with. We allow our customers to offer thousands of integrations without involving their engineering team at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:47):
I can tell you that if team had to build integrations like this, how nice would it be to be able to take this off my roadmap and instead use something like OneSchema and not just to build it, but also to maintain it forever?

Christina Gilbert (00:41:59):
Absolutely, Lenny. We've heard so many horror stories of multi-day outages from even just a handful of ad records. We are laser-focused on integration reliability to help teams end all of those distractions that come up with integrations. We have a built-in validation layer that stops any bad data from entering your system, and OneSchema will notify your team immediately of any data that looks incorrect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:19):
I know that importing incorrect data can cause all kinds of pain for your customers and quickly lose their trust. Christina, thank you for joining us and if you want to learn more, head on over to oneschema.co. That's oneschema.co.

(00:42:33):
Let me summarize the first five real quick and then we'll keep going. So the first is, wait longer than you think to hire a head of growth. Wait until you have product market fit, maybe a million, or especially if you're self-serve oriented.

(00:42:45):
Number two is if your growth is declining, the head of growth won't solve that problem. First, stop the decline at least. Third is redesigning your homepage, marketing page. Rebranding is not only not going to help you grow, it's going to probably hurt growth and slow things down. And so just go into that wide eyes wide open.

(00:43:07):
Four is don't just copy the competition and assume they know what they're doing and assume that what they do is going to work for you. Use it as inspiration. On the other hand, look at get inspiration from experts, competition, trends, things like that to help you solve your problem, which you think is no one solved before. It turns out every problem you're solving someone has solved in some way, most likely.

Elena Verna (00:43:30):
Yes, especially in growth. I mean, I know this can apply to a lot of product management and to marketing as well, but in growth, when you're talking about how do I lift activation or have a really big drop off between activation and monetization? These things are a lot more patternized than you would expect them to be, so go and find those patterns as opposed to trying to re-engineer it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:55):
Awesome. Okay, let's keep going. Number six.

Elena Verna (00:43:57):
So next one. Next one is a little spicy one too, and that is part of growth you owning some channels. A lot of growth teams own acquisition. So owning channels and growth prioritizing SEO, SEM, social, is one of the biggest mistakes I think a growth team can do. Now, obviously, I'm not saying don't do SEO, or don't do SEM, so organic search or paid search. I'm not saying that. However, as a growth team, your number one priority is to create your own or your earned channel. So channel that you've earned and that nobody else can compete in but you.

(00:44:45):
What do I mean by that? When you're doing organic search or paid search, you're making Google richer. Great for Google. Google is an incredible company, but by dumping money into paid marketing, you are paying them and you're paying for their distribution and access to their distribution. If you're doing social too, like you're doing, let's say, Instagram or whatnot, paid advertising in Instagram, that's great, but all of that works on algorithm. An algorithm can giveth, but algorithm can also taketh away at any point. And you have no control because you don't own those channels. You are playing with other players and you're competing against them in somebody else's channel.

(00:45:29):
Now, on the other side, there can be your own earned channel. What is earned channel? It really goes into the concept of product-led growth acquisition, which means you're relying on virality, on word of mouth, on user-generated content in order to attract new acquisition through top of the funnel. So why is that earned and why do I put that above, let's say organic search, which is SEO, obviously, is wonderful? But again, search just goes to Google. That's great. Versus if you build your own user-generated content in your own community, nobody else can compete with you in that. That is yours. Your competitors cannot buy their eyeballs. Their people are going to be attracting other people.

(00:46:21):
Referrals from people to people are everything. So, Lenny, if I, let's say I sign up for, say, Superhuman and I invite you into it. That is much stronger acquisition tactic versus you looking for and finding Superhuman, let's say on paid marketing advertisements. And especially with our age right now where search as an interface is changing towards AI interface and the AI interface is giving a lot less credit to all of the content. Content is almost becoming a database and there's a new UI that is being developed on it. Before it was Google was the UI, and now AI is coming in with a new UI, and there's not as much control that you have over this new UI that is being developed.

(00:47:05):
Focusing on these earned channels that you own becomes the outmost priority. And if you don't have them on your growth roadmap, you are going to be in some really big trouble over the next year to two years because your cost of acquisition is only going to go up. Your competition and those channel is only going to go up. You're constantly going to be praying to algorithm Gods to giveth your way, but again, they can taketh at any point. And it's really one of those fundamental growth team failure points if they don't spend enough time on virality and user generated content to create their own earned acquisition.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:48):
Wow. Okay. This is incredible. This is its own podcast episode in theory that we could do of how to actually do this. We're not going to cover the strategy. Also, this may not necessarily work for every company. Your point is, you can grow other ways, but this is by far ...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:00):
Your point is you can grow other ways, but this is by far the most powerful, most effective, cheapest, most likely to succeed. If you can figure this out.

Elena Verna (00:48:08):
It's not cheapest. It's actually cost a lot of product and engineering and even marketing resources to stand up. So it's not the cost of a budget, but it's cost of people that will have to work to create your own channel, so to speak, for acquisition. And you're right, maybe that's not for everybody, but it's actually applicable to more products than people realize. Because, every single product has some sort of team functionality, some sort of roles that they need to do. Every product can drive word of mouth loop... Well, actually, that's not true. Not every product can drive word of mouth loop, but they can drive recommendations and they can create user generated content.

(00:48:46):
One of those tactics usually applies to at least one product. So there is an opportunity to create some sort of earned channel, even though it might feel unnatural at the beginning depending on how you reach PMF and how you've scaled in the first couple of stages of it. But if you are not exploring it and if you are not investing into it or at least trying and failing within it, I think that you are really leaving too much of your growth future into the hands of somebody else that you have low control over.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:19):
So the advice here is your growth team. It's okay if they work on SEM, pay growth basically and SEO, but most of your effort and investment should be in earned channel, owned channels, specifically virality generated content?

Elena Verna (00:49:35):
Diversify. Just diversify your strategy. So not all of it is reliant on somebody else giving you access to their distribution. Now, for example, a Dropbox, over 50% of acquisition comes through sharing. So I load something into my Dropbox, maybe I need to send it out for signature. Maybe I need to just share this file to transfer it to somebody. Maybe I just need to share this file as a final delivery to my clients that I was working with. Well, that recipient then is now aware of Dropbox, so it solved the brand awareness.

(00:50:09):
By that action of sharing, you actually almost activated that recipient too, so you don't need to educate them anymore on how the product works and whatnot. And the percentage of those recipients sign up to become Dropbox users, and that accounts for 50% of acquisition. That is a stable earned channel that nobody can compete with, and it's only for Dropbox to lose, so to speak. And we actually had our own growth pod focused on it. Because to optimize both sender experience and the recipient experience, because it was such a powerful growth and growth engine that driven the company, and every business should have an attempt at one of these.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:51):
I think this is going to be a really good push for a lot of growth teams to think about what could we do here? Number seven. Four to go

Elena Verna (00:50:58):
Number seven. We've talked about this at least a little bit in our last podcast too. But I see this as a question that comes up all the time and something that people are afraid of to invest, which is a mistake. Every single company starts with their growth efforts focused either on product-led growth. Hey, I'm going to have everything being done self-serve or on sales in marketing. I'm going to have sales team and then I'm going to have marketing team and they're going to do all of the work and my product is just going to create the functionality. And that's good and fine for a while depending on how long that while is. But not overlaying every single way that you can grow through product, through marketing and through sales as an evolution. Is a huge mistake that a lot of growth teams fail to iterate on and innovate on.

(00:51:53):
The way that I best be comparing it is if product has a product-market fit, which is great, that product-market fit is not going to last that product forever. They're always going to have to have a second horizon. They're always going to have to have a product-market fit expansion efforts in order to continue to grab as many people and solve as many people's problems as possible and increasing their team. Well, the same comes with growth. If you have a growth model that works for you, that's wonderful, good for you. Optimize it, grow it, scale it, create a team that will be nurturing it and that will be amplifying it, but you're going to need to evolve it, and that evolution needs to come through overlaying other growth models on top of it. So, A, you are diversified away from just one growth model failing, because a lot of times you're going to get into a situation of law.

(00:52:48):
I love Andrew Chen's article here. It's called a Law of Shitty Clickthroughs. Where if you over-optimize the same thing over and over again, it has minimal returns, and some growth models have very limited time spans. Some of them are huge, some can grow for sharing loop at Dropbox. It's 17 years in the making and it's still firing. Good for it. That's amazing. But that's very much an anomaly. Most of growth loops spin out their ability to produce meaningful results for you within the first five to six to seven years.

(00:53:21):
So continuously overlaying those different growth models, and what I'm specifically talking about is product-led growth, marketing- led growth, sales-led growth, and introducing it into this ecosystem constantly is what really separates companies that can continue growing for a long periods of times versus the ones that can see a really big blip, potentially even unicorn type of growth rates of 70, 80, whatever plus percent, and then it starts to slow down. And don't wait until that slowdown happens. You need to really start thinking about different ways that you can attract people to grow so you are not leaving a gap in the market that somebody else can enter and own. As opposed to you playing in every way in where you can interact with your customer.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:13):
The way I think about this is the S-curves of every growth model and growth lever, right? Eventually it'll help and then slow down and see you want to find the next S-curve on things that'll grow your business.

Elena Verna (00:54:24):
Yes, absolutely. The way that I see it often is that especially when growth teams, they hit a really big result out of some initiative, they just keep trying to focus on that over and over again. And sometimes that focus is warranted. Like I said, our sharing loop at Dropbox has its own growth team against it. Great, but at the same time, a lot that's not warranted for all of the... Or you need to realize that there's not more choose to squeeze out of this thing and then you need to go and you need to move on.

(00:54:57):
Which actually brings me to a little bit of a next thing too, is you need to do it every 18 months. Because a lot of them are going to fail. And every five years or so, you for sure need new channel, new growth loops, new tactics, new engines so to speak, to power your growth engine. Whether it's overlaying sales on top of self-serve, whether you're doing a lot of, let's say virality right now in terms of acquisition and you're going into marketing a lot heavier. But every five years something big has to start taking a big portion of your volume. And for that every 18 years you need to introduce something-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:39):
18 months.

Elena Verna (00:55:40):
Sorry. Yeah. Every 18 months you need to introduce something new in order for it to continue evolving.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:49):
And was that number eight of the list we're going through or that's like a bonus piece of advice?

Elena Verna (00:55:52):
No, that's just a bonus piece of advice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:55):
Okay, cool. Okay, got it. And so the advice here essentially is you'll find something that is helping you grow, assume that will slow down at some point, start thinking about other levers and growth models to layer on top of that.

Elena Verna (00:56:08):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:10):
Something I've seen, let me know if you agree, is usually there's going to be one lever that has most of your growth for a long, long time, and so all other things are not going to be as big, but they are still important.

Elena Verna (00:56:20):
So the way I think about it is I try to focus 20 to 25% of growth teams time annually. Not every given sprint or not every given quarter, but annually to introduce a new growth loop, or to introduce a new channel, or to introduce something new that can potentially bring us additional umpth to our growth engine. I know that a lot of it is going to fail. None of it is gold on any growth metrics because you cannot goal it immediately, let's say on monetization or immediately acquisition. You're just going to cut it at its knees immediately if you're not going to let it evolve into something that can be monetized, that can be responsible for acquisition. So example on Mirrorverse, which is a user-generated content library of all of the mirror boards that people create, it took us probably 18 months until we started putting metrics expectations on it.

(00:57:18):
Before that, it was a thing that we were testing. And it was being used by a lot of people, but we're like, we don't even know exactly quite how this is going to fit all together. And then it started taking off as both engagement engine as well as acquisition engine. But it's important to constantly give your team room to try those new ideas. Otherwise, you're going to find yourself that your growth loops and your growth engine is slowing down and you don't have time to find that second horizon. And that is the worst situation to be in. That's where growth starts to slow down. And to recover out of that is impossible because you need revenue. You need revenue, you need revenue, you need revenue. And these growth loops on average take six months, a year, a year and a half to start producing even visible revenue. So that's why you need to start layering it very soon into your initiatives.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:13):
To make this even more concrete for people that are starting to like, oh, shit I got to do this. Can you just give us a list that doesn't have to be exhaustive of potential growth loops, levers, methods, engines for folks to consider? You've mentioned a few, but just give a list of people like, okay, got it. Maybe we'll try one of these.

Elena Verna (00:58:29):
I'm really big on creating a growth loop out of user generated content. I think with everything that is happening with AI and SEO at the moment, your biggest claim to fame on content strategy will be harnessing user generated content. Whether it's user generated templates, whether it's user generated case studies, review, whatever it is you need to start investing into it now, creating a library out of it, using it for activation purposes, using it then for acquisition purposes, using community to spark the conversations around it. That can be a really wonderful strategy that everybody should consider of whether there's juice in it within your product. Other ones can be, hey, we're a very, let's say individualistic product, but can we actually create a referral mechanism for it?

(00:59:23):
For B2C, that's actually very straightforward. A lot of B2C products thrive on referrals. For B2B, It can be more of invitation of other team members into the product to complete other jobs to be done. Hey, I've done this. I need my manager to see it. Can I create a report to share with my manager? And all of a sudden it starts to spread within the company. So creating additional almost product functionality that then creates these loops potentially for you. So it can be a slew of things. Obviously, I would highly recommend just understanding all of the menus of these earned tactics. I should do a blog post on it actually. And then just see what works for you or not. Because at least ideation step a bit has to happen. If especially you're relying on search engines for your acquisition, start thinking about some of the earned channels as soon as possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:22):
And even though you recommend spend more time on earned channels, owned channels, there's also explore SEO, explore paid growth, right? Sales?

Elena Verna (01:00:33):
Absolutely. I mean, almost everybody that's paid, arguably almost too soon potentially. There's a point to make that shouldn't be. A company should not be doing paid right now, but SEO, social resellers, all of those are wonderful tactics. Obviously, I skew very heavily towards earned channels just because once you stand that up, that's a gift that just keeps on giving and nobody can take that away from you. But that doesn't mean that other tactics and other channels should not be explored as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:06):
Amazing. Let's keep going. So we have three to go. Number eight.

Elena Verna (01:01:10):
So number eight, this one's kind of a doozy and I think a lot of people don't do it. I don't know why they don't do it. I think it's such an incredible ability to propel forward. And that is, what doesn't work, as I said in the previous growth tactics, is trying to think that each problem is unique and you need to solve it on your own. Maybe this is not so much does it work, but not hiring advisors is something that I do not recommend for you to do. You can get access to anybody for one hour a week. Yeah, you'll have to pay them. So nobody's going to volunteer their hour. We're all very, very busy. But hiring advisors is the biggest career amplification and your business amplification can possibly do. Because to create a network of people that have all of these data points and those all of the other patterns that you can do is something that can just propel you so far forward.

(01:02:16):
That doesn't mean you have to do everything advisor says. That's not the point. They're not the strategy setter. But they are additional input into your decision-making that you otherwise wouldn't have. You can go and hire somebody from Atlassian. You can go and hire somebody from Airbnb that have been and lived through all of this and they can help you solving your problem. So I think any growth team that does not have an advisor is a growth team that is underperforming. Because even me who I've advised so many companies, I've operated at so many companies, I don't know everything. Every time I take an operator role, I hire advisors for myself. Because that is the fastest way to learn anything, and I often see these teams that just try to figure out everything on their own and not have any advisors on their boards, so to speak.

(01:03:11):
I'm not even talking like an official board. I'm talking not even an advisory board. But you can hire somebody as a contractor that will be your advisor, I think is a huge mistake, especially in this day and age. Because we have a big asymmetry of information. In our field, there's very little available to learn because we're all very cagey because of competition. But at the end of the day, people know a lot of the stuff and how it worked for them internally, and I highly, highly encourage you to not try to wing it on your own.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:45):
Along those lines, there's also advice of just like, don't worry about advisors. You never know if they're going to be useful. There's all these hanger-ons that join your startup and want to help, but they're not helpful. If you give one tip for a founder or team that's interviewing advisors, looking for an advisor to vet them to help them find people that are actually great, what would your tip be?

Elena Verna (01:04:07):
I have actually a good one. Many advisors might not like it though. I think that you should not hire an advisor until you do some sort of workshop with them on the problem that you're experiencing. See them in action. See what kind of information they can provide to you, because any advisor that is cagey about what they know is not the type of advisor that you're going to want to have on your team. You want to have somebody that has lived through it that can talk to you, to your face about it, that is able to have hard conversations. That is able to provide you necessary examples. That is able to give you and connect dots for you for necessary patterns. So instead of just saying, "Oh, this person looks good, let me hire them as an advisor." Say, "Hey, let's have a workshop first. I have this problem. I think that you can help me fix it."

(01:04:57):
Pay them for it, whatever their rate is for that workshop, for sure. See how they actually interact with your team and then hire them on ongoing retainer bases. Because that creates an interview loop that is very practical, that is very quick to understand whether you can work with them, they can work with you, and whether they have anything to contribute to you. And then every single month evaluate whether that advisor should stay with you. Some advisors, they only need to be with the company for three months and off they go, that's fine. Some of them might stick with you for four or five years, but every single month you should go and say, did they add any value? I'm not saying that advisors should have any monetary expectations like revenue attribution, so to speak to them. But did you find value in having conversations with them? Did they offer anything valuable to you?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:49):
That was an awesome tip. And I could see why people would be like, "God damn. Elena, don't say that." It makes so much sense. Here we go. Number nine. Here we go.

Elena Verna (01:05:59):
My last one is also that I see something way too often nowadays on growth teams specifically. This is very, very gross problem. And that is too much risk averseness on growth, where you're starting to test everything. If every single one of your initiatives that you're doing on growth is an experiment, that's a problem and that is something that you should take a look at and say, what am I doing and why do I need a precise scientific measurement for every single thing that I touch in order for it to go to production or to hit the market?

(01:06:47):
It's almost like a disease, like a paralyzing disease, that slows down progress, that slows down velocity, that slows down learnings, that creates very terrible consequences to the output that growth teams produce. And it's a little bit counterintuitive, because experimentation is a way to do growth for growth teams and it's their process. Growth teams are meant to experiment, but I also think that experimenting on everything is something that is quite terrible once the team starts to get locked into that state, and it's really hard to get out of because they're then afraid to do any change until or unless that they test.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:39):
So where do you find that balance? I imagine people hearing this are like, oh, yes, this makes sense to me, and then they continue to test basically everything. What's kind of some heuristics you'd recommend for knowing, okay, just don't test that. Don't worry about it. You don't need credit for that win.

Elena Verna (01:07:52):
First of all, I think that people should trust their intuition a little bit more. Data is good, but data is only good if you have enough of it. So if you have low volume real estate, that is going to take you eight months to reach some sort of answer. Do you really want to test it for eight months? What's the point of it? My rule of thumb, if we cannot collect the sample size in the month, we shouldn't test it, period. Because it's just then it's not fast enough. We should just go and do pre versus post. Pre versus post is pretty powerful. It's also a way to assess your impact and you can still roll back if it doesn't work. But don't think that everything needs a scientific explanation to whether it needs to be moved forward or not.

(01:08:36):
Also, experimentation cannot be the way that people make decisions in the company. There's still so much about knowing your user, understanding the market for your brain to connect all of those dots and to know what needs to be an experience that your customers are going to want. That if scientific data, like a very tight determination of the probability that this is a success, it's important, absolutely do it because it might be a really big strategical pivot that you're planning to do. So it's a data point to validate that all of this extra work will be needed. It might be a very high traffic real estate that even 0.1% difference will mean millions of dollars for you.

(01:09:17):
But other than that, it should be just go, go, go. Do pre versus post. By the way, I'm not saying just release and move on. Release, do seven day, 24 hour readout, seven day readout, 28 day readout, even come back to it a year later and measure some of the retention or extension data that is associated with it.

(01:09:38):
But to test everything is debilitating to growth teams and app paralyzes them in its place. So kind of look at your initiatives and say, where do I need precision? And it's important and I can get it best in that versus where we should just go for it. And yeah, we will fail there too, and that's okay. And we can roll back and we can figure out how to make it better. But failure is going to happen regardless.

(01:10:08):
In statistics, six is tricky. Many people take it for face value versus it's just like a directional data point to say there's likely new distribution that has maybe a different mean, and 5% of the chances. If you measure in 95% statistical significance, you might not even be there, and yet really take it for so granted. Oh, it's going to drive this much lift. So I just think that people stop in this age of data, almost rely enough on their element intuition.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:42):
A lot of contrary intakes here. I love this. Elena, we've reached number 10. And I know number 10 is like a special one where it's more than one. Quick. Fire.

Elena Verna (01:10:53):
So number 10 is going to be my little fire round. My fire round on little things that I just see people spending way too much time on it. It hurts my heart, because it's not going to drive any results on them. So number one. Color optimizations. Because the love of God, a blue is a blue is a blue. As long as it's accessible and as long as it's bright enough, off you go. You do not need to test the shades of blue or test it against green or so on. Pick a color, move on, please don't spend time on it. That's an early 2000s tactic. It doesn't work anymore. We pass that in technology sector.

(01:11:26):
Number two. Third party signups. A lot of times we think, oh, we're going to get so much more acquisition if we add Google Auth or if we add Facebook Auth or Slack Auth or Microsoft Auth, whichever auth you want to add to it. In some cases, it's very important to have third party auth. So for example, if you are a developer product, please have a GitHub auth. It's kind of unnecessary. The developers already have the account there, have them connect with it as opposed to create a new one. However, if you're a productivity product, email is fine for the longest time. Gmail is nice. It's not going to drive more acquisition for you. You're just going to do a makeshift, and two more people...

Elena Verna (01:12:00):
... more acquisition for you. You're just going to do a makeshift and two more people using it. It's not going to create incrementality, it's not going to improve your activation, it's not going to improve your retention. It's not a growth tactic. It's part of you just customer experience that you want to invest into. Number three, on the fire round, one email wonders. We stress too much about this one email that we're going to send to this one customer group. And we're like, oh gosh, how much lift is it going to cost? It'll never cause any lift. You will never work as a one-off email. Too few people open it on average, 25% open rate. At best you'll get 40 to 50% open rate. Too few people click it. One email will never do anything. If you're going to go into email, please think about it as a series about communication, about how it interacts with product communication.

(01:12:48):
It's a whole strategy. It's a whole thing. Please don't stress about one-off email. Never test a change in one email. It'll never work. You're going to have to do the whole god damn thing and see how it's going to do. Not just one email, just never going to work.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:03):
I'm definitely guilty of this one. That is a really good one for sure. And it's so obvious in hindsight, so I love that you share that.

Elena Verna (01:13:09):
Yes. And then the last one, growth teams are often too obsessed about removing friction. Because if we remove the steps, then more people are going to get to the destination. And to an extent, if you cause horrible friction in your product where it's just confusing about what the next step is, I agree, go fix the friction of the cognitive load that it takes to complete a step. That is the friction that you should be working on. However, just removing steps or yanking or simplifying things to an oblivion where you lose an identity of what you even do or what you're capable of doing is a completely failed growth tactic. So simplifying may be an initiative of a different problem that you're solving, but if you ever have a line item on your roadmap that says simplified onboarding, please cross it out. It's not going to work because simplifying onboarding is an action.

(01:14:08):
What is the problem that you're solving? You're never trying to solve a problem of simplifying. You always have a problem of people are confused in it, but people don't know where to go or they get lost in it or they're not educated enough. That is the problem. And simplifying might be a solution, but it can never be a problem on its own. And too many growth teams are just obsessed with this notion that came out I think in early 2000s, like, oh, simplifying is the biggest growth hack that you can do. Do it. It's only a solution to a very specific problem set of too much complexity.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:48):
Wow, that was a big one to end on. That I think will help a lot of people avoid wasting time. Again, a whole other podcast conversation probably focus just on onboarding advice that you probably have, that I know you have. We've reached the last item. Is there anything else you want to share about this list before we move on?

Elena Verna (01:15:07):
No, I think we've spent too much time. We're ready to go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:09):
Not too much. Just enough time. And kind of on a note, I want to call an audible, and so we were going to talk through all of your favorite frameworks. I like the way this conversation has gone. I don't want people to get overwhelmed with information. So one idea is just list maybe your favorite growth frameworks just for folks to go check these out and not spend too much time on each one.

Elena Verna (01:15:30):
Yep, let's do that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:31):
Okay.

Elena Verna (01:15:32):
Great. So the list of my favorite growth frameworks. And to me framework by the way, it's not a solution, it's a pattern. It's a pattern that exists across almost every single company out there and it's a starting point for your ideation and to figure out how you can almost shortcut to possible list of solutions as opposed to trying to figure out too hard of how to even define a problem on its own. So number one, it's probably expected if anybody has read anything or listened to me talk is growth loops. I think anybody who thinks about growth and anybody who thinks about growth in the funnel fashion versus understanding what the growth loops are is missing out on the ability to create sustainable growth engine. So it's very important to think about action, reaction that generates another action and it's a self-contained flywheel they can spin. A lot of resources on it at Reforge, Brian Balfour and Casey Winters and Andrew Chen wrote a lot about this.

(01:16:33):
Highly recommend anybody looking into. My next favorite growth framework's actually written by you, Lenny, and Dan, which is a race car framework. Everybody has a really hard time often thinking about what are all of them parts of growth initiatives and which are long-term, short-term, how much are they going to actually produce in results? And race car framework is wonderful because it separates different initiatives into, hey, there's some engines, loops that are just going to keep on spinning. There's some fuel that you're going to need to add into it, potentially like paid marketing dollars. There are some turbo boosts that you may have in your race car that are going to be, let's say big user conferences that you're going to hold as a product or there's [inaudible 01:17:22] and optimizations that you're going to need to do pouring oil into that engine so that actually performs correctly. It's beautiful. I talk about it all the time with everybody.

(01:17:31):
The next favorite growth framework for me comes from Bengali and that's adjacent to user theory. I think that was very powerful in terms of thinking about growth evolution. And as we talked about adding different growth models to your growth ecosystem, different growth loops, but also adjacent users which are outside of your ideal customer profiles or ICP, outside of your core user and how growth team can really bring them in and add additional oomph to your product without even expansion of product market fit by just optimizing their experiences. I'm going to stop at these three because I think those are the most powerful ones.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:09):
Cool. On that last one, [inaudible 01:18:11] Bengali was on the podcast. We'll link to that episode if you want to go deeper on the adjacent using user theory. I love how that was a few minutes on things that could change people's life if they adopt one of these frameworks and learn how to think about growth in this way. It's such a powerful mental model for thinking about all this stuff you've been talking about this entire conversation.

Elena Verna (01:18:30):
Yes, those frameworks are like my church in my mind of my system of beliefs of how I think about growth and how I think about it on a strategic level of owning it as a strategy, not just like a tactic or an initiative.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:47):
The church of Elena Verna. Amazing. Okay, so before we wrap up, I want to bring us over to Contrarian Corner, recurring segment on this podcast where I like to ask the guest if there's something they believe that most other people don't believe. Contrarian opinion you might say. Is there anything that comes to mind?

Elena Verna (01:19:08):
I do have a very contrarian opinion, although it's not so much related to growth as opposed to maybe your personal growth and my contrarian opinion is that full-time jobs are not the best way to monetize the skill that you have. It's one of the packages that everybody should evaluate and take advantage of, but too many people blindly default to that package and don't explore other options that are both available on the market as well as best suited for their personalities, for their interests, and for their skill set. It's like a default plan that everybody subscribes to that is faulty in itself.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:57):
Wow. Okay. Wait, we got to hear more. So what are some other packages? I think we're buying some of these packages, these other options, but I guess what should people be thinking about when you say this in terms of what can they actually do and explore?

Elena Verna (01:20:08):
I'll premise it to saying I don't want to rain parade on full-time roles. They're wonderful on video ability, to learn to get the expertise and depending on which career stage you are at full-time roles might be the absolute necessity for you to move on to and unlock the next level. However, full-time roles boxes into one company that may not be a great fit for us culturally, for our skills, for our ambitions, for our interests. Life is too short for that and ability to really go and figure out your own best monetization model, just like you work on that for your business, you should work for that on yourself without an assumption oftentimes is the only option that you should have.

(01:20:56):
So what are the other options? There's so many, obviously the couple known ones. Freelancing, you can be a contractor. I do a lot of advising and consulting because for my brain of how I work and how I like to puzzle solve and pattern match, it works much better to be horizontal across many companies versus vertical on one specific one. But that doesn't mean I still don't take those vertical engagements to deepen my knowledge into any specific topic. But overall it's a lot more interesting for me to pattern match across multiple companies and help them grow as opposed to just focusing on one.

(01:21:34):
There's interim engagements where there's a predetermined end date to your agreement. There's fractional engagements where you're working part-time on something as opposed to engulfing yourself completely. There's other ways to create courses, there's a way to create newsletters and monetize them like you're doing such a fantastic job. So there's just so many options and people are sometimes paralyzed by fear of instability, that it creates when you start to explore other options because you don't have that contract with that one company that provides you that paycheck every two weeks to rely on. But at the same time you can create diversification for your career and you depend on when you need to pull that trigger and when is the right time for you to explore. But to spend your entire career only assuming full-time is the only way I think is a complete mistake that a lot of people are doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:33):
One of my favorite posts of yours along these lines, which is around increasing... What you want to do is increase optionality and I guess talk about that because I think it's a really powerful piece of advice.

Elena Verna (01:22:46):
So this advice of career optionality, being the ultimate north star for anybody in their professional journey is something that I'm very strong on because a lot of people have the goal of, I don't know, maybe I want to be a VP or I want to become a CEO. Or I don't know, I want to be a manager and I want to people manage. And this becomes their north star and they start working towards it. But a lot of people when they get to their perceived corporate ladder north stars find themselves extremely dissatisfied, depressed even by how terrible that job is. Could people manage your job? I wouldn't wish it on my worst enemy because it's a terrible job if you don't enjoy it and you don't know if you're going to like it until you actually do it.

(01:23:33):
So I think setting a title as your goal, which so many of us have titles as goals, is very wrong way to think about it as opposed to saying, "Hey, my goal professional is actually to have options so I can choose what I want to do. So I can choose what fits my life right now that I can choose what fits my skills and that fits my personality and that makes me happy."

(01:23:54):
And to get career optionality, if that's your goal, you start thinking about your progression a lot differently. You're not starting to think about it of what will get me to the next title. You start thinking about what will can I do next year that will increase my option pool? And that's very different than just getting to a higher title. And if you start thinking about evaluating opportunities or whether you should stay at the company, whether you should move at the company from the lens of does it increase my options if I stay at this company for one more year or does it keep it the same or does it actually potentially decrease? That is the right way to find your ultimate happy place and happy job that brings you energy, that brings you happiness versus just going for a title and then being very disappointed with what that brings along with it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:48):
Amazing advice. So important and something I'll add that I think is a balance to what people may be feeling here is like, oh, I'll just bounce around all the best logo companies and create this killer resume. I think you also need to build depth and actual experience that you can tap into if you do any of these things. For example, a lot of people want to jump to like I'm going to be a newsletter person, I'm going to start a podcast, be an advisor before they've done anything real and you have nothing to actually base your advice on and that part is very important.

Elena Verna (01:25:16):
You have to earn your right to unlock optionality and earning that right does usually lie within full-time jobs. That is a universal truth. But then at some point you should start not just looking at full- time jobs as the only option that you have. You should start to think about when can you start unlocking new ones and testing the market on it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:39):
The other point is that you've been a great example of is it's not a one-way door. You can have full-time job, go to something else, go back to full-time job, be an advisor, be an intern person, be a newsletter person. You do that really well.

Elena Verna (01:25:53):
You should have to do it all. It's all a menu of options and you pick a menu item that fits your best in any given point of your life. It's never say never and never shut the door on anything. Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:03):
Oh my god, Elena, this was incredible. Before we get to our very exciting lighting round, is there anything else you want to share or leave listeners with, maybe a last nugget or thought or not because covered a lot already.

Elena Verna (01:26:13):
No, I think we've covered so much. I don't want to overwhelm.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:16):
Let's do it. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Elena Verna (01:26:21):
Yes, I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:22):
First question, surprise, surprise. What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Elena Verna (01:26:27):
Okay, so I just finished this book that I love so much, it's not a professional book, but it's Project Hail Mary by Andy Weir. It's the same author that wrote Martian. Martian also was made into a movie. So good, so good. Can't put it down. I think I read it like two days straight. So highly recommend that. And the next one that I also started reading right now is Body Burst. Body Burst is so good. It's actually takes into account AI and how we can upload our consciousness in AI and what can happen with that. So highly recommend that, I think it's actually closer to what potentially can be in the truth for us in the future than not. But I'm a big sci-fi geek, so I read mostly sci-fi books.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:14):
I have a sci-fi recommendation for you that comes from Noah Smith. I love his newsletters called Noah Opinion and he has a list of his favorite sci-fi books that I've been working my way through. It's called, you may have read it by Werner Vogel, Fire Upon The Deep. Have you heard of this?

Elena Verna (01:27:14):
No, I have not.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:29):
Okay. It's described as not a sci-fi but space, like a space opera where it's epic, the most epic scale of universe story.

Elena Verna (01:27:38):
I'll download it tonight, it'll be on my list.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:41):
It takes a little bit to get into. It's quite unique, but you just keep going and it's incredible and AI plays a big role in it actually.

Elena Verna (01:27:48):
That's awesome. I'll download it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:49):
There you go. Okay, question number two. Favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Elena Verna (01:27:55):
Yes. I just got to watching Beef on Netflix. It's so good. I'm not going to spoil it for anybody, Beef. You should watch it. It's a limited series. It's so good. It will run through. I love Veep on HBO. So funny. I've probably watched it two times already the entire series and I'll probably watch it more because it just cracks me up every time. I think this is actually how our government works, so I'm very intrigued by that. And then the last one that I really liked that is coming up with the season two now. So you should catch up with season one is Last One of Us. If you don't like zombie movies or zombie shows, don't watch it. But if zombie and apocalypse is your cup of tea, Last One of Us is so good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:44):
Or the Last of Us? Or Last One of Us? Last of Us.

Elena Verna (01:28:44):
Is it Last of Us?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:48):
I'm Googling while we talk, Last of Us. I think it's Last of Us. Yeah, the Last of Us.

Elena Verna (01:28:53):
Oh, Last of Us. Okay, Last of Us.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:56):
You're saying there's a third season coming soon. That's exciting. I didn't know that.

Elena Verna (01:28:58):
Yeah, it's so good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:00):
Okay, I love it as well. Great pick. Okay. Your favorite product you recently discovered that you really like?

Elena Verna (01:29:08):
I recently discovered that they make heated shoes and that changed my life. My feet are always cold and they are boots that actually have heated wires through them and I'm obsessed.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:22):
And are you like charging it, like USB plugin kind of thing?

Elena Verna (01:29:25):
Yeah, I just come in, I plug them in and then I go outside and I'm warm and I think it's magical. I have a jacket, also heated jacket, now I have shoes. I just need my gloves and I'll be all set.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:40):
I love the USB powered clothing. And we should know you live not in Silicon Valley, you live on the East Coast sort of?

Elena Verna (01:29:46):
Central. In Central. The coldest it gets is 30s here, but I'm always cold, so this is just my love language is something heated that I can sit on. I'm that cat sits underneath the light all the time. And then I also just got AirPod Max, my headphones. I couldn't connect it to my computer. Still technical issues on that, but I love them. The sound is amazing. That's my new favorite gadget that I'm obsessed about.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:14):
What a cool combination, heated shoes and AirPods. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to that you find useful in work and life?

Elena Verna (01:30:25):
Yeah, it's really one, progress over perfection. I think that you just need to... The velocity of information is far more important than something that I think is perfect and perfection is an outcome that you get to. But progress over perfection all day, any day.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:47):
Very appropriate for a head of growth person.

Elena Verna (01:30:51):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:51):
Final question. You're not only one of the smartest people I've met on growth, you're also one of the funniest people on social media, especially on LinkedIn. If people aren't following you, they should. They will not only learn, they'll also be highly entertained. Is there a favorite meme that you created that you are very proud of that you can describe that we might want to link to?

Elena Verna (01:31:13):
Yeah, so I also want to say a lot of people hate me for doing so much memes as well because they think it's not serious. And I actually, I want to rebuttal that really quickly because I think humor is the best way to disarm people and to point out very painful situations that we're facing with every single day or conundrums without putting anybody on defense. Because we can all laugh at the absurdity of the lives that we live in every single day. And a picture's worth a thousand words. And sometimes memes are just the best way to communicate the most complex situations that we are facing within our corporate world. And they help us understand how common all of those situations are. We're not unique. You're not feeling alone by feeling down about what happened. Everybody's going through the same thing. So that's why I love memes because they help connect people on both sides.

(01:32:05):
Even if you're making fun of one side because they're like, yeah, that is true and this is so funny. So I'm a big proponent of that just because I think it's actually a better way to both unite people and just talk about hard problems that otherwise would be not read if you put it in words.

(01:32:26):
But my favorite meme is actually one of the first ones that I've created and I think it's from Family Guy where they have an elephant and the penguin standing and then there's Moses I think, or some biblical character saying, "What the hell is this?" Looking at the elephant and the penguin. And the result of it is a child that has a penguin body and an elephant head. And if you think about elephant as product and penguin as marketing, what the hell is this is gross. Which is a byproduct, a weird, weird byproduct, product and marketing merged together that doesn't really fit with either, yet it's its own entity. I don't know. I think that that's the best to describe to people what [inaudible 01:33:14] is.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:14):
So appropriate. Also, it's hard to describe a meme and make it feel funny. So good job. Thank you for doing that. We'll link to this meme in our show notes. Elena, this was incredible. Thank you again. Thank you for being our first ever third return guest. Hopefully there will be many more episodes of Elena Verna. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more and how can listeners be useful to you?

Elena Verna (01:33:37):
Find me on LinkedIn or my Substack. I'm not competing with you Lenny, but I share a lot of my thoughts and everything that I learned on my own Substack. It's just elenaverna.com. LinkedIn is for all of my memes, so go there if you want to laugh, but if you want to learn from what I'm learning, go to my Substack. And how you can be useful? Tell me what problems you're facing now. Don't tell me, oh, how growth is slowing down, what should I do? I can't help you with that, too broad, but if you're having a situation, there's often really good [inaudible 01:34:09] for me to go and write about it or to do more research about it. So I just love to hear what some people's minds, so I can both help them connect their dots as well as learn about it myself.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:20):
And what's the best way for them to do that? Is it like DM me on LinkedIn, any other-

Elena Verna (01:34:24):
DM me on LinkedIn or just reply to my Substack newsletter email. It goes directly into my personal inbox, so I read every single one of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:32):
That's a really good tip. People don't know that when you get an email on Substack, if you reply, just goes straight to the author.

Elena Verna (01:34:37):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:38):
Elena, thank you so much for being here.

Elena Verna (01:34:41):
Okay, thank you for having me, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:43):
Bye everyone.

(01:34:45):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You're ahead of growth at Lovable on track to be the fastest or one of the fastest growing companies in history.

Elena Verna (00:00:06):
We're over 200 million in ARR. At this point, we're 100 people large, the pace here is insane.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:12):
You said that you've had to throw out most of your growth playbook.

Elena Verna (00:00:14):
I feel like only 30 to 40% of what I've learned in the last 15 to 20 years of being in growth transfers here because we just need to invest in such bigger bets, and innovate, and create new growth loops here, everybody and their mother is starting a vibe coding business nowadays, and we need to figure out how to be ahead of them. And to be ahead of them is not optimization of the problem, it's reinvention of the solution. I just feel like I usually spend maybe 5% innovating on growth in my previous roles, right now, I'm spending 95% innovating on growth, and only 5% on optimization.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:48):
What do you find is actually moving the needle?

Elena Verna (00:00:50):
One of our biggest strategy is building in public, and it's coupled with employee socials, founder-led socials. And another one is giving your product away a lot, this is part of our growth secret sauce. You have to remove the barrier of entry. If somebody, one of our users stands up and say, hey, I'm going to have a hackathon at my work on Lovable, can you give us some free credits to play with? Why would we prevent a person who wants to do all of the marketing and activating for us from using us? We're like, take it, how much do you need?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:22):
The trick is get more people to try it, just ship things you can talk about.

Elena Verna (00:01:25):
The only way to create a word of mouth loop is just to blow their socks off.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:31):
Today, my guest is Elena Verna, head of growth at Lovable. In under one year after launching, with fewer than 100 people, Lovable hit 200 million ARR, which is one of, if not the fastest ramp to 200 million ARR in history, and growth is still accelerating. They've also recently raised a series B at a $6 billion valuation. So, with that, there's a lot to learn about what Lovable has figured out about growth. This is Elena's fourth visit to the podcast, a record, she is my favorite growth mind, and in our conversation, we talk about how the growth playbook has fundamentally changed for AI companies. What works now, what no longer works, and what has surprised her most about how Lovable grows.

(00:02:13):
She also shares her advice about whether working at an AI company is right for you, some incredibly interesting insights into Lovable's secret sauce for growth, the unique ways they operate internally, their approach to building minimal, Lovable products, also how they hire, and also how product market fit as a concept is no longer what it used to be, and how every company basically has to recapture product market fit every three months. This episode is incredibly tactical, and you will leave this conversation smarter on so many levels. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube.

(00:02:47):
And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 19 incredible premium products, including a year free of Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Devin, PostHog, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, raycast, ChatPRD, Mobbin, and Stripe Atlas. Head on over to Lennysnewsletter.com and click Product Pass. With that, I bring you Elena Vernon, after a short word from our sponsors. Here's a puzzle for you, what do OpenAI, Cursor, Perplexity, Vercel, Plaid, and hundreds of other winning companies have in common? The answer is they're all powered by today's sponsor, WorkOS.

(00:03:25):
If you're building software for enterprises, you've probably felt the pain of integrating single sign- on, Skim, RBAC, audit logs, and other features required by big customers. WorkOS turns those deal blockers into drop-in APIs, with a modern developer platform built specifically for B2B SaaS. Whether you're a seed stage startup trying to land your first enterprise customer, or a unicorn expanding globally, WorkOS is the fastest path to becoming enterprise-ready and unlocking growth. They're essentially Stripe for enterprise features. Visit Workos.com to get started, or just hit up their Slack support where they have real engineers in there who answer your questions super fast. WorkOS allows you to build like the best, with delightful APIs, comprehensive docs, and a smooth developer experience. Go to workos.com to make your app enterprise-ready today.

(00:04:14):
This episode is brought to you by vO from Vercel. vO is the web development assistant designed for professionals of all technical backgrounds. Whether you're a product manager, designer, or developer, transform how you bring products to life. With vO, everybody can cook. Don't just show up to reviews with docs and ideas, arrive with working prototypes that demonstrate real functionality. vO drafts project plans, generates interactive interfaces, and builds full stack applications without writing a single line of code. And with features like AI and database integrations, screenshot import, and sync with GitHub, vO helps reduce development bottlenecks and enhance collaboration between technical and non-technical team members.

(00:04:57):
The result, faster iteration, and a shorter path from idea to implementation. Vercel built vO for the builders who want to create at the moment of inspiration. If you can dream it, you can ship it. Visit Vercel.com/lenny to get started. That's Vercel.com/lenny. Elena, thank you so much for being here and welcome back to the podcast.

Elena Verna (00:05:24):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:26):
As you know, this is a record fourth time back to the podcast, no one else has ever achieved this feat. I feel like you're basically my co-host now.

Elena Verna (00:05:36):
I love it. Thank you for inviting me back, I'm very proud record holder in this regard.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:41):
What I love about you coming back each time, it feels like every time you come back, you're just doing something even more epic and exciting. And so, these days, as we'll hear in the intro, you're head of growth at Lovable, which no big deal on track to be the fastest or one of the fastest growing companies in history, depending on the metric that you track. Let's talk about just the scale and growth of Lovable to give people a sense of just how incredible this is. I'll share a bit of this in intro, but just what are some stats you can share about just how things are going Lovable?

Elena Verna (00:06:08):
So, we are just a little bit over one year's old since we launched. The company actually did exist as a GPT engineer before, but it officially launched in the third week of November last year, in 2024. So, for us, we've hit over $200 million in annual recurring revenue before we even hit our one-year milestone since being launched. Which is pretty incredible. You, Lenny, actually have a really great blog post on how quickly it takes for companies usually to get to their first million ARR, and it's usually multiple years. So, this is definitely a unicorn, I don't think this is a standard. There's a couple of things that account for it, and we can talk about it, and the growth is only accelerating, so it's compounding, which is great. Because we had our 100 million in end of July, and just four months later we were at 200 million.

(00:07:02):
So, seven months to, well, maybe eight months, to 100 million, another four months to get to 200 million. And from users too, we already have over eight million users that have tried Lovable, we have, as you can imagine, to feed that 200 million, hundreds of thousands of paid subscribers as well that are paying for us, so things are going great and we'll talk about why.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:27):
Okay. Absurd. I think people are getting used to these insane numbers, and not long ago is like, okay, if you hit a million ARR in a year, you're doing pretty well.

Elena Verna (00:07:36):
Yeah, yeah. I think still you're doing pretty well if you have a million ARR in one year. This is one of the once in a lifetime type of companies, and the category, the way that it's evolving. So, I want to make sure that people don't all of a sudden set this as a benchmark for success because it should never be. In some categories, it might be even faster as we continue evolving technology, but I don't think that it's realistic to expect it out of your business that you're starting right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:08):
That is such an important point you're making there, it's so discouraging to founders to hear these stories of getting 200 million. And again, this is ARR. There's a lot of companies, especially in the data labeling space, I've had them all on the podcast, that are very fast-growing, but they're not recurring revenue. There's also, they pay out their people to do this data labeling. So, the revenue numbers there don't really equate. Recurring $200 million a year is absurd.

Elena Verna (00:08:36):
Yeah, it is absurd. I really want to make sure that people understand as we go through this episode as to why it's happening, because part of it is on Lovable, part of it is just in the market and how it's moving. So, when you're setting yourself as a benchmark, so you know which benchmarks you actually to use, and whether Lovable is the benchmark that you should be using.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:56):
Cool. I'm going to get into that next. Last question, just I want to see what you can share here. A lot of people look at these numbers, a lot of people are very skeptical these are lasting, durable numbers. Like who are these people? How is there $200 million being spent on Lovable? Anything you can add about, just give people confidence, is this real, this is going to last, this is a really durable business.

Elena Verna (00:09:19):
Well, I saw Stripe receipts, so it is real, as far as I'm concerned, unless Stripe dashboard is lying to us. But it is money getting deposited in our bank account. But let's talk about who is actually contributing to that number. We do have a really large use case of people starting their own companies on Lovable, so we call it a founder use case. Where somebody that is non-technical, that has never been able to code or create a piece of software is now able to come in and actually build an app completely from scratch. And some of them are already monetizing it, some of it just using it [inaudible 00:09:52] for other services, or some physical goods, for example, that they're selling. Some of them are just still building. And we monetize on the act of building, so that progression of building up to your product market fit takes quite a bit of time.

(00:10:06):
And even with Lovable, we're so much more efficient and effective compared to hiring an engineer in terms of the price, but it still takes time. So, we have a lot of founders, whether it's B2C, whether there's B2B, so consumer products, business products, e-commerce, whatever it is. But on the other side, we have a lot of employees within companies using Lovable as well, where they're building internal tools, or they're building prototypes, they're building landing pages. So, that is another use case that is very relevant and quite efficient for us, but then there is a hype and discovery that is happening as well. Because when I think about software, I think about it, I talked to John Cutler actually, and he gave me this framework that is completely stuck in my mind, of software always goes through capabilities stage first, so what is possible to actually create with this?

(00:11:00):
Then, it needs to transition into value, of how is it that am I going to get value out of this? And then you can start thinking about scaling it, of which aspects of my life and my work that can actually go in? And we're right now very much in the capability stage with vibe coding, because everybody's just exploring, what can I do? And the beautiful thing here is that what you can do changes every month to three months. So, you constantly need to come back and you need to see what has changed. So, a lot of people use it for personal reasons. I build myself apps, tutoring apps for my kid, so he has to answer questions in order to get some screen time accumulated for him. I build my own portfolio.

(00:11:40):
I see people doing wonderful things, my favorite story that I always say, there's this man that created a proposal on Lovable. So, his fiance had to answer questions and she had to complete this game, and then at the end there was this big reveal and he proposed to her. But people just unlock the most creative things that they build on Lovable, and that's where the revenue is coming from. The one piece that is working very well for us in terms of how our monetization model is, set up and how it interjects with your activation moment, which we can also cover, but that is what's driving both conversion and retention rates.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:17):
Let me ask you one question that's on people's minds, I imagine, as you talk about this, just what does retention look like?

Elena Verna (00:12:22):
Yeah. So, retention, really, I look at it in two ways, retention, that it comes as a subscriber retention. So, how much [inaudible 00:12:32] subscribers do we get, and how many of them are we capable of renewing? There's also very important aspect of it is, how many of them can we expand? Because if you can get positive or above 100% net dollar retention, which is super important metric for investors... If you don't know about net dollar retention, please read it up, that's like a superpower to get bigger multiple if you can show NDR that is over 100. And then there's actually engagement retention as well, because that is the leading indicator for how your paid retention is going to look like. For paid retention, I know there is so much on the market of, oh, this is a high product, and it's a leaky bucket, and it has really high churn rates.

(00:13:10):
Although, I shouldn't share, it's not public numbers for us to share actual retention, however, what I can say, it's on par with benchmarks of other B2B SaaS products that I've ever worked at. And I worked with Miro, Dropbox, SurveyMonkey, Netlify, Amplitude, and others. So, are we absolutely crushing with paid retention? No. Are we where most of the other companies are? Yes. Our NDR is quite good because when people build, they want to buy more credits to build. So, we're seeing really good revenue retention, but we're honestly more focused right now on engagement retention than even paid retention because our North Star is just to get as much usage as possible, and we will fix and tune our monetization model afterwards. So, engagement retention, I would say, is a by far bigger priority focus for us at the moment.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:04):
That is incredibly interesting, and I'm optimistic to hear because of the growth rate. Rarely is growth rate this high and retention is on par with great companies.

Elena Verna (00:14:15):
Yeah. And I'll just say too, which is a little bit maybe counterintuitive would be to a lot of companies, we don't optimize for revenue at all. In fact, internally, we have a lot of discussions about how can we give more products away, how can we reduce our revenue growth rate by just getting more paid subscribers, more users using Lovable, to just get bigger share of the market. So, our revenue is an outcome of us just trying to get more people through the door, not us trying to optimize for revenue per user, or to get them to monetize at the higher rate. So, there's a very interesting path here, where, by actually focusing on the inputs, like you should, it translates to a good output, but we don't look at that output as something that we're trying to grow.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:02):
Let's talk about growth, let's talk about what you've learned about growth in this space. You had this post online where you said that you've had to throw out most of your growth playbook. This is a huge deal, you've led growth a lot of really successful companies. Lovable is growing incredibly well, this tells me there's a lot we can learn from what you've seen. So, tell us what you're seeing, what's still working, what's not working, what you've learned about what it takes to drive growth at a company like Lovable.

Elena Verna (00:15:28):
Yeah. I would say that in any other role that I've come into before, I felt confident in about 80% of the patterns that I can bring to that role, meaning that I can identify inputs, understand which framework applies. I know a lot of examples that fit in within that framework, so we just need to localize a solution and push, and it was quite productive in terms of getting a company those additional acquisition, conversion, engagement, monetization rates. So, I felt very repetitive in a way, after some time, because I feel like I'm just coming in and copy, pasting, copy, pasting... And although every single company loves to say that they have unique problems, at the end of the day, all of the problems were very similar. And I felt like I was doing the same job over and over again. When I started at Lovable, the one thing to me that was very clear is that this company was growing like crazy before I joined.

(00:16:21):
So, I want to make sure that there's not that much value on what I have even added today, because this company is on the tear, and yes, we're rounding the edges and removing barriers for growth, so we're not standing in our own way, but there's something more magical happening here that is not a pattern that I've ever seen before. It's not a framework that I can even conceptualize in my head. And plus, it's a new category that I've never seen, or I've never been in a company that is in a new emerging category, that hits fast moving water so quickly. And that's the difference because when you're usually trying to create a new category, it takes years. I know it's every marketer's dream to create a new category, but it takes decades often to really get that much hype and adoption around it. Versus with vibe coating, this hype seemed to have happened really quickly.

(00:17:16):
It's like it's hit the nerve with the market. So, yes, we're at the right place, we're at the right time, but we're also in really fast moving waters, and the demand that is coming to us, we need to capture it mostly, we don't need to generate a lot of it yet. But at the same time, it comes with the really big downfalls of we're not in control of a lot of our growth. Let's be honest about it, there's so much incredible word of mouth that is happening, and we're trying to grow that, but to enable as much of that as possible, but the company is moving, we're just hanging on to it as fast as possible, and making sure that we're not going to hit a wall, so to speak, in front of us, and that the wheels are greased, and that all of the pieces are in places. It's like your race car framework that you have as well.

(00:18:05):
We're really just putting a lot of oil into it, and figuring out what is our engine actually going to be that is going to take us forward. But when I'm thinking about the patterns here, and what I have to unlearn, I feel like only 30 to 40% of what I've learned in the last 15 to 20 years of being in growth transfers here. And some of it is very straightforward, okay, this is how you're going to do paid marketing, this is how you're going to do some of the habitual retention, here's the free to pay maybe monetization frameworks that still stand. But the rest of it, honestly, it doesn't feel like it even matters anymore, because we just need to invest in such bigger bets, and innovate, and create new growth loops here, as opposed to trying to optimize it to the moon and beyond, which I usually be focused on in a scaled business like this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:57):
Let's follow those threads. So, what is it that no longer is worth it in this bucket of just like, let's not spend any time on this thing, and then what do you find is actually moving the needle?

Elena Verna (00:19:06):
Not worth it, in growth, most of the people spend most of the time optimizing existing user journeys. So, you already have maybe some of your growth loops that you understand that you try to optimize or you just know, hey, there's big drop-offs from acquisition to activation, let me go figure out how to... I can tweak the dials to get it done. Here, what I find is that optimizations are just not worth our time. So, a lot of the times my growth team actually ends up working on new features, or just standing up new growth loops one after another, and yes, there's of course the saying of more growth loops does not mean more growth, but at the same time, the market is moving so quickly, you need to stand up a bunch of initiatives to capture it because it's perishable.

(00:19:54):
Or we also have so much competition. We're not alone here, so we can't ignore that there's everybody in their mother is starting a vibe coding business nowadays, and we need to figure out how to be ahead of them. And to be ahead of them is not optimization of the problem, it's reinvention of the solution. So, I just feel like I usually spend maybe 5%, maybe 10% if I'm lucky, innovating on growth in my roles, in my previous roles, right now, I'm spending 95% innovating on growth, and only 5% on optimization. And most of my frameworks are on optimization because it's really hard to come up with frameworks for innovation because by default there, by definition, they're innovative.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:38):
What I'm hearing here is new features. Launching new features, [inaudible 00:20:42] product is one of the bigger growth levers, versus you have a bunch of cool stuff, make it easier to use, increase activation, reduce friction, things like that.

Elena Verna (00:20:51):
Yeah. And for example, we on growth team launched integration with Shopify, to enable e-commerce use case, because we're like, hey, there's already people trying to come in and do it, Shopify was open for integration with us, let's go lean into it so people can vibe code their storefronts. That came out of growth, that usually would never come out of growth. Why would growth team ever invest into a core product integration? Or we enabled voice mode for people so they can actually chat with Lovable using their voice, as opposed to only having type. And that's also, it's a feature, it's a core product feature, but we're like, hey, it's going to help people to converse with Lovable more, it's going to increase the engagement.

(00:21:32):
One area that we've spent very little time in is activation, because usually I spend majority of my time in activation because there's so many awareness things that need to happen, and so many things that we need to smooth out experience for the users in order for them to get through that setup moment, to aha moment, to the habit loop, and here you're just interacting with agent. So, we, at the beginning, we're like, the agent team that we have here is working a lot on it. Why would we go in there and do anything? It's like our core team is responsible for activation. Now, we're starting to move into doing agent work ourselves, so all of a sudden growth team is not just doing product surfaces, now we're doing agentic workflows and codifying agent instructions in order for customers to activate better.

(00:22:21):
So, the work fundamentally, I feel like has gotten deeper into product, and deeper into actual core product functionality, as opposed to just being a smoothing surface on the outer layers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:35):
Okay, that is also a very big deal, every growth person that's ever been on this podcast, including you, always talks about the power of activation, just how much opportunity there is to get people to this aha moment, realize the value of this product, that increases retention and increases everything. And what you're saying here is you barely spend any time on activation because in a company like Lovable, there's a prompt, you give it what you want, it generates a thing, and that's basically all it is. And so, the impact is to make that agent better...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:00):
... basically all it is. And so the impact is to make that agent better at that thing, versus micro-optimize every step.

Elena Verna (00:23:07):
And our agent team spends night and day thinking about it. So I've never been at a company where core team thinks so much about activation, thinks so much about that first generation, thinks so much about reaching a-ha moment. So it's more weaved in into DNA of the overall company, which takes the pressure off of me to only have to focus on it. Because otherwise, yeah, I would be in that experience all the time.

(00:23:32):
But I feel a lot more at ease, because everybody's thinking about it and everybody's working on making agents better. And agent, the beauty of it is it doesn't matter if it's actually first generation or if it's your Nth generation. It just needs to be a better generation. Agent needs to understand your intent better, and think and reason behind it. So it improves the entire lifecycle immediately as opposed to having to only work on that first experience per se.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:59):
And what you're not saying is, "Don't care about that experience," it's, "The team building that is already obsessed with making that activation experience better and better."

Elena Verna (00:24:07):
Exactly, exactly. I love that, because that's the core product functionality at this point. And before people would spend more time building deeper features, or deeper use cases, or trying to improve some platform functionality. And now the core team, they're obsessed about that first experience because that is core product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:29):
Another lever that I've noticed, especially with Lovable, and I'm seeing it more and more on social media is just founders telling you what's going on. I think this connects really deeply with the new features. Launch new features. Say Anton is just like, "Hey, check out this cool new thing. Check out our growth numbers." Is that a big growth lever too?

Elena Verna (00:24:47):
Yeah. So one of our biggest strategy is building in public. Building in public, and it's coupled with employee socials, founder-led socials for sure. This is difficult for larger companies. But when you're smaller and you still have a little bit more narrative control with everybody on your team, plus you have so much more trust within the organization, where people are going to say the right things because they understand what actually has happened, that ability to just really quickly deliver the message to the market becomes really important.

(00:25:21):
Now, we still do the big launches, so we still have everything tiered into tier three, two, one. Tier ones are going to happen as big moments that we're going to really rally as a company behind. And it's going to be something that is meant to step function, change our product market fit, and we're going to do a bunch of activities behind it.

(00:25:40):
But at the same time, what's really important to us is to maintain noise in the market. And that noise in the market happens by us shipping every day, every other day, multiple times per day and just talking about it constantly. Interestingly enough, it's actually works fantastic resurrection strategy, because people are like, "Oh, there's more things here. I need to go check it out."

(00:26:03):
It also works as a great reengagement strategy. So instead of sending newsletters to say, "Here's the market trends or here's the user stories," people are literally logging into their social to say, "Okay, what has Lovable shipped now?" It's like, "What is the change?" So it's interesting to them to see, because from the time that they voice their opinion on what needs to happen to actual delivery is so short, so they feel heard. And they are heard, because that's how we prioritize all of the things that we're shipping. But it's interesting, because I've never been in a company that tries to maintain so much just shipping velocity to maintain a certain amount of noise that it feels like the product is alive. It's changing every single week. And then there's these big amplifications, turbo boost so to speak, in the race car model, that then go out and they fundamentally create a step function change in that product market fit as a whole. And that is a retention strategy I can get behind any day and all day. I only hope that we can maintain it as we continue scaling.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:07):
Sounds stressful. This reminds me, I had a... Gaurav, he's the CEO of Mirage. Used to be called Captions, which is a really successful AI video company startup. And they have a policy of you ship a marketable feature every week. That's how their company operates. And it's the same thing, it's just ship things you can talk about.

Elena Verna (00:27:27):
Velocity of shipping is our number one core value in development team. So we do anything and everything to just keep it going up, up, up and into the right. And by the way, this also means that everybody has a little bit of marketer within them. We have very lean product organization. We actually lean on our engineers to do a lot of product work. We call them product engineers, and they have to go and they have to announce the thing that they've shipped. It doesn't just funnel through marketing.

(00:27:57):
So there is a lot of autonomy, a lot of agency that needs to happen with this type of velocity. Because otherwise, you have to have enormous marketing team to staff that. So it has to come with some roles and responsibilities. Redefinition on the team as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:13):
Let's talk about marketing. That's something else you've written about is just marketing is changing in a big way, their role in growth. How does marketing play a role in all of this?

Elena Verna (00:28:21):
On one side, marketing channels are changing. On the other side, marketing's involvement into everything that product does is changing. And then number three, I think even marketing organizations in terms of where they hire the most are changing as a result as well. So I'll talk about second one first, just because we just talked about shipping, and that is... Yeah, you still have your product marketers, you still have your channel managers. But they focus more on the big things and the narratives.

(00:28:49):
Although it's difficult, because the narrative even changes all the time. As these functionalities come through, usually you can come up with a positioning and messaging, and you can have it for years and create all of the campaigns around it. Now, you have it for three months, and then the product changes. So the cycles here are really, really short. And for smaller changes, because cycles are so short, they spend so much time actually focusing on it as they should.

(00:29:15):
But some of these smaller changes just cannot be supported by marketing. You have to delegate it to your product and engineering team to do their own marketing, because otherwise, again, you'd have to have an enormous marketing team in order to support it all.

(00:29:27):
But at the same time, channels in which marketing right now works I think are changing quite a bit. And not enough people I feel like are freaking out and talking about it, as opposed to moving just in the same direction over and over again. And the changes that I'm seeing is that it has been very clear to me that when you're talking about marketing organic strategy, if you asked me that five years ago, I would've said that's SEO. It's search engine optimization. Go on Google, that's your organic marketing strategy.

(00:29:58):
If you ask me what's your organic marketing strategy right now, to me it's all about social. Which is what is my CEO posting? What is my team posting? What is my creator economy doing? Influencer marketing, and across all of the social platforms. That is my organic, which is... That one's paid, to be fair. But when I think about organic, there is still a lot of that word of mouth. What are my users posting on social? What are they talking about it? What are they sharing?

(00:30:26):
Which is a mind shift, because I've been always... Especially in B2B, so focused on search. And now I feel like it's been completely pushed even further into consumerization territory, and it has become all about social no matter how B2B you are, because that's where eyeballs are at.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:44):
That is fascinating. And so when you talk about socials, what are you finding is most helpful? Is it Twitter/X? Is it LinkedIn? Is it YouTube, TikTok, Instagram?

Elena Verna (00:30:52):
For founder socials, our employee socials, X and LinkedIn are fantastic sources. Especially for B2B, because that's where all of the BBWB people are at. But you cannot just have ChatGPT write your copy and post it, you need to show personality. There needs to be humanity that it goes through it. And it's not natural for everybody, and it feels very awkward sometimes to start. But it's important to people to see who is building the company, because there's so much competition now on functionality, so they can rally behind a team.

(00:31:28):
So they want to have a team that they want to win. And for that, you need to be vulnerable, you need to be authentic, obviously, but you just need to be yourself. That corporate scrubbing has to completely fall off, which is obviously going to pull in as the company scales. But at least at the beginning, that is your chance to stand out.

(00:31:52):
And then your customers posting about you. So that word of mouth of really creating a product that creates something for customers that is worth talking about. It gives them stories that they want to share, that feels empowering to them to tell to others like they're unlocking a secret. They feel proud of what they have created.

(00:32:14):
Which what we focus a lot on, Lovable on, to have that feeling of, "Oh my gosh, I have superpowers now and I can't wait to tell others. I cannot wait to show others what is happening." So on both of those sides, to me, that is very much organic. If you aren't a consumer, then Instagram, TikTok are very much a go as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:35):
The CEO clearly is an important variable in this, them. In this case, Anton just tweeting, "Here's what's going on Lovable. Here's how fast it's growing. He's something we've learned."

Elena Verna (00:32:44):
It is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:44):
We had the CEO of Gamma on recently, granted, and he's exactly the same thing. Just sharing a bunch of lessons, journey building in public, a big part of the growth lever. And your point here is okay, so it's the CEO. But then it's also how do you get your customers to share things on socials? And then there's a paid influencer component.

Elena Verna (00:33:01):
Yes, the customer is difficult one. That's a word of mouth loop that you need to stand up. The only way to create a word of mouth loop is just to blow their socks off when they actually experience your product. We have a almost unfair advantage, because our product is called Lovable. So by default, we're trying to create absolute lovable experiences. That is a mentality internally. If it's not lovable, we're not going to ship it. And the best way to fix a bug at Lovable is to say, "This is not lovable," and everybody just jumps on it to fix it right there and then. Sprints, no sprints, it doesn't matter, it's getting fixed right now.

(00:33:40):
So from that perspective, we have that culture already embedded as part of our brand and it's part of our name which helps us a lot. But the point is that you feel that brand through every interaction. I talk to my designer all the time, how can we add more love marks into the product? How can we prioritize more unique interactions? The little elements that make up that feeling of this product is speaking to me. It's like, "It feels something that is unique." It has personality behind it.

(00:34:08):
So we put all of the brand work actually into our product. When you think about Lovable, people think about a brand, but we don't have a brand marketing team yet. So it's all just through product interactions, and some of those building and public moments of the people behind those product interactions that is our strategy.

(00:34:28):
And then there's influencer marketing. Interestingly enough, influencer marketing is 10 times bigger for us than paid social. So yeah, we do some paid social as well, and it's working decently. It's quite expensive from payback period, we're still optimizing it. As I said, we're pretty early on in all of these channels. But influencer marketing is something that has worked from the beginning at Lovable. And a reason behind it is that influencer marketing, especially on the socials, it gives you an opportunity to have a little video and interaction. And Lovable is all about seeing like, "Oh my gosh, this is what I can do, and this is possible." So that drives people to go and try it themselves.

(00:35:07):
So that's why social works very well for us, because it's not really a written value proposition. Nobody knows what vibe coding is. But you watch 10 seconds of it and you go, "Whew, that's new. Let me go give it a try."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:18):
Who would've thought that a head of growth, who is traditionally seen as data, metrics, spreadsheets, drive KPIs is like, "Okay, how do we make this more lovable? How do we add more moments of delight?"

Elena Verna (00:35:31):
I know. My joke is at the end of my Lovable journey whenever... Hopefully it never comes to an end. But at the end I'll be a growth brand person. Hi, my name is Elena, I do brand now. But I actually see it as part of growth strategy to make sure that that brand shines through every single interaction. And I always talk to my team about it, because that is one big lever in our growth story.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:58):
Yeah, so I think that's a really important point to highlight. The reason Lovable is growing so fast is it is a product people love. You've made something people want. And the word of mouth spreads, because it's something that blows people's socks off as you said. So it feels like that's the first thing you got to get right.

Elena Verna (00:36:13):
Yes. Well, the first thing you have to get right is you have to be at the right place at the right time and you have to be in fast moving waters. Let's not discount how fast this category is exploding on its own. So this cannot happen in every single category that you're starting to build a product. But the way to stand out in the super crowded category is to create experiences that speak to people.

(00:36:33):
That I think is something that a lot of people deprioritize, because they still prioritize functionality over humanity within software. And I think that we're actually moving to the new era of software that needs to feel human, that people want to interact with, not just utility of it. Because cost of software is coming down so much to develop that we now can actually invest into emotional feel of that software, as opposed to only just focus on creating the utility out of it.

(00:37:04):
So to me, it's a... I love this move, because I hate nothing more than going to software that is just so painful to use that I lose some brain cells as I'm interacting with it, versus software that I feel I get energy out of. And for Lovable for me, I cannot wait on some of the projects that I have to go and vibe code myself. That's the highlight of my day. I bring in my daughter and I'm like, "Let's go do this." Like, "What do you think that needs to be done?" Because I just get so much energy out of doing it. And that is the feeling you cannot create by looking at it as a utility problem.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:42):
The way I think about it, the way what you're describing is it's almost table stakes have increased, and now it's so easy to build. Now the big differentiator is experience, design, delight.

Elena Verna (00:37:52):
Exactly, and it has to translate through every single interaction. So your designer has to be one of your first hires now in startups. It's not just about the engineering, so to speak, utility. And you have to think through every single interaction of, does this communicate our brand or not?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:09):
So along those lines, I want to come back to something you talked about, which is launching new features as a huge growth lever. The big question there is just how do you maintain quality and cohesiveness as all these people are empowered to ship stuff? Is there anything else there you've seen that works well to help avoid just the Frankenstein product that's endless features that you want to tweet about?

Elena Verna (00:38:28):
Yeah. One part of it is not something that you can codify, but it's the type of people that you hire that are going to go and ship these things. We at Lovable try to hire the absolute best talent available out there that we can bring in, and that we can source and that we can attract to grow with. And what do I mean by that best talent? It's not that somebody who has been at really large companies, or somebody that has really done a lot of logos or has big success stories behind them. It's somebody who is extremely passionate about their job.

(00:38:59):
It's their hobby. They love to work. They have fire in their belly. This is not a paycheck for them, they want to do this for some ulterior reason. This is the biggest opportunity of their life, so this is global maximum against any other opportunities that are in front of them at the moment. So that's very important for us.

(00:39:18):
We want people to come and do their absolute best work at Lovable. It's very important, and you can feel it in this office. People are wired up. They are so high on how can we make this better? How can we deliver more to our customers? And that's very different compared to usually how companies grow where like, "Okay, yeah, the check, check, check. They fit the skillset, let's bring them in." But is that passion, is that fire behind it?

(00:39:45):
And then the second piece is that we work really hard on just addressing what's the success here looks like? What is it that we're building? What use cases are we building for? And then because we hire these people that are so passionate about it, the other two skills, by the way, that are super important is high agency and high autonomy. I can figure out things that are tangential to me that I don't need other specialties, so to speak. I don't need a marketer to go launch something, I can go figure it out. And I have high agency, I can go do it myself. I'm going to own it all the way from start to finish. Those are very important, something that we screen for and something that we look for in our culture.

(00:40:25):
And then you just see... What you want to do is up to you. So there's very little supervision that happens on the ground. Now, we all have goals and some of the big launches that we're all marching towards, but some of the work that is completely up to developers, up to marketers or whatever, what is it that they want to do? So there has to be that enablement of go try things. And because of our velocity, if you fail, it's not a big deal. We'll just pivot, we will get through it. We are not here to just win all the time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:00):
On the hiring of these incredible people, as we all know, it's very hard to hire people these days, especially the best. What have you seen Lovable does differently or does well that helps them recruit the best?

Elena Verna (00:41:10):
Yes, and especially recruit in Stockholm. The main office here is in Stockholm. We're asking a lot of people to relocate, which is no small feat. Now some of it makes it easy, because of how much hype we created around our product. People want to come work for us. They're reaching out to us. They're saying, "I love what you're doing, I want to join it." So that we have a cheat code to it, because we have... Most of the time when we reach out to somebody, they say, "Yeah, I would love to explore." So building that product that is highly lovable also creates a really great recruiting brand for you as well. So make sure that there's multiple benefits to that.

(00:41:49):
But second of all, we do a lot of trials for people. So trial work to see them in action.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:56):
Yeah, a work trial.

Elena Verna (00:41:57):
A work trial to see them in action for a couple of days. We pay them as part of the work trial. We have some probation periods that we start people on, because this company is not for everybody. As I said in the podcast in the beginning, the pace here is insane. I went on vacation for the first time. So I've been here for six months. I went on vacation for 10 days. I came back, I felt like I needed to onboard from the beginning. Everything changed.

(00:42:26):
And when I'm in it, I feel like it's an evolution. But the fact that just being gone for 10 days, it feels like a complete revolution in the company. That pace is just not for everybody, and that's okay. Because I'm a very firm believer that there's different cultures and different environments that the best fit for different personalities and different people.

(00:42:44):
So we try to be very upfront with how things are and how chaotic they are, and we prioritize people that don't look for clarity. We can create clarity out of chaos because it is absolutely chaotic otherwise. And if we start to look for people that can explain it to us, that's the only way that we can succeed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:06):
The way you described going on vacation and it feeling very different, it feels like when you don't see your kid for a few days and they're just completely different. You're like, "How did you grow up so fast in three days?"

Elena Verna (00:43:16):
Yeah, exactly. Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:17):
Let me try to summarize the growth levers that you're finding are working, and I'm trying to think about this from the perspective of an AI startup trying to think about, "Hey, shoot, how do we grow faster? What has Lovable figured out?" So it feels like number one is just build something lovable, something that blows people's socks off, but also in a market that is growing that people want to pay money for. You can build something lovable that nobody actually cares about, that there isn't much money going to this space. There's no tide pushing it forward, and it won't work.

Elena Verna (00:43:46):
I call it minimum lovable product. It shouldn't be minimal viable product anymore. Viability is left back in 2010s. Now it's minimal lovable product. That's the only thing that matters.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:59):
I love how these AI tools are letting us... PMs have always had these smoke door test, or what's the term? Or it's not a real product. Paint the door.

Elena Verna (00:44:11):
Paint the door. Paint the door.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:11):
Paint the door, there it is.

Elena Verna (00:44:11):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:12):
Yeah. And it's like, okay, we just have a landing page. There's nothing there. And now AI makes it easier to do that, and it's more full-featured.

Elena Verna (00:44:18):
Yeah. Well, it's the feedback cycle. It's just completely collapsed. You can go from idea to some product that is functioning to user feedback within a day if you want to, depending on how fast that you want to run or how complex the product is. For missions, it took us a couple of weeks to vibe code it to the point to where... I have a full-time vibe coder on my team. He's amazing. So he wanted to create videos. He did a bunch of designs for it too. It took him a couple of weeks, we're testing it now and then we'll push it in the product. But it's a completely different development lifecycle.

(00:44:54):
Before, it would just take so many more steps from user research to the design sprints, to prioritizing an engineering roadmap, to build something minimal and viable to actually test to little long testing cycles. Now it's just like, "Boom, let's go." It could have taken us a day, we just decided to take a couple of weeks to get all of the video pieces correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:19):
I saw you launch this on LinkedIn. To me, it looked like a full product launch. It is interesting to hear this is just a prototype.

Elena Verna (00:45:26):
Yeah, it's minimum lovable product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:30):
Minimum lovable product. Okay, I got to ask you, you said you had a full-time vibe coder. What the heck is this? Is this an engineer? Is this something else? What is a full-time vibe coder?

Elena Verna (00:45:38):
Great question. This is a new job role that is actually popping up here and there. It's absolutely fascinating to watch this development, because I see vibe coding as a skill being added to a lot of job descriptions. For designers, for product managers, for marketers, which I think is a really interesting shift. Finally, Excel can move over. We have a new skill to add that is super empowering and not-

Elena Verna (00:46:00):
... it's super empowering and I'm not 30 years old, but vibe coder, so his name is Lazar and he actually was chief of staff in his previous role so he's not technical at all. He's self-taught in technical aspects of it, but he was very early on in the vibe coding wave so he learned a lot about it. He was user of all of the vibe coding tools, Lovable included.

(00:46:26):
And when I was coming into the role, I'm like, "I have so many projects that I will vibe code myself," so I run this woman only hackathon, SheBuilds. I vibe coded the first version of that site and submission process for applications, and then other people came in and started building on top of it. But I vibe coded, but then I don't have enough time sometimes because I need to run around and I want to push out so many different initiatives that I want to test in the market with our own product. So we connected on social and I'm like, "Would you join us?" And he joined us first part-time. I'm like, "You're bringing so much value."

(00:47:03):
For example, we partnered with Shopify, and he created a bunch of Shopify Lovable templates, vibe coded for us. And it's been so helpful to have somebody like that that is just pushing all of these things out. And he's an absolute expert, so he's teaching us all too of what is possible with Lovable because he's on the cutting edge of constantly pushing it to the limit. I really enjoy having that role, which I've never had before in my life and in my team.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:31):
I'm not surprised. I've never heard of this role before as a real full-time job. Do you think this is a thing people will start hiring for at non-vibe coding companies?

Elena Verna (00:47:41):
I vibe code myself so I would put that as even as a skill on my resume now. It took me a while to figure out, by the way, everybody's like, "Oh, you just go in and it all happens automatically."

(00:47:52):
It takes you a couple of iterations, couple of projects until you know, okay, this is how I need to translate it, how I need to think about it. But for me, it's when I started scaling of what I want to vibe code, that's where his value really came in because I'm like, "Okay, I understand what is possible. I know what needs to be achieved." And some of these apps, I want to be almost full-blown built because they're not going to get incorporated into the product anytime soon. They don't need to be. I'll just link to them from our header, so to speak. And he really accelerated that velocity for me.

(00:48:23):
So once you get into vibe coding and you see its value within your organization, leaning into somebody like that, just accelerates your velocity because it is like an engineer on your team. It's just they're not, to me, he's part technical, but they can be non-technical if they're really good.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:40):
That is fascinating.

(00:48:41):
This episode is brought to you by Persona, the verified identity platform, helping organizations onboard users, fight fraud, and build trust. We talk a lot on this podcast about the amazing advances in AI, but this can be a double-edged sword. For every wow moment, there are fraudsters using the same tech to wreak havoc, laundering money, taking over employee identities and impersonating businesses. Persona helps combat these threats with automated user, business, and employee verification. Whether you're looking to catch candidate fraud, meet age restrictions, or keep your platform safe, Persona helps you verify users in a way that's tailored to your specific needs. Best of all, Persona makes it easy to know who you're dealing with without adding friction for good users. This is why leading platforms like Etsy, LinkedIn, Square, and Lyft trust Persona to secure their platform. Persona is also offering my listeners 500 free services per month for one full year. Just head to withpersona.com/lenny to get started. That's with persona.com/lenny. Thanks again to Persona for sponsoring this episode.

(00:49:47):
Let me go back to summarize just real quick the growth levers, I want to move in a somewhat different direction. Things that help Lovable grow. One is just build something that blows your socks off, as you said. I love these phrases out here. The second is make noise in the market. And the way that Lovable does this, the CEO's tweeting constantly. You build something that blows people's socks off so that they share things on socials themselves, plus this influencer marketing component, and just this idea of building in public has been really helpful. This point about activation being embedded within the product team of the AI agent essentially, so it's essentially not the growth team thinking about activation. It's the product team that is building the AI magic that is obsessed with activation. It feels like those are the main growth levers. Is there anything else that I missed?

Elena Verna (00:50:38):
Community. I think community is really important here because you need to bring people together as they're exploring these capabilities and as they're seeing what's possible so they can bounce off each other and they can help each other out. I would say community also amplifies that word of mouth. It amplifies all of the social posting. It amplifies retention mechanisms for you as well. The community has been a huge part of Lovable's success as well, and that's something that was started very early on.

(00:51:05):
It runs on Discord, so it's nothing fancy. It's not like we build anything completely from scratch for ourselves. And it has hundreds of thousands of members and it's very lively. We have community managers that are making sure that all of the questions get answered and the right groups are being created. We have incredible ambassador program now as well of people doing it. I would say community here, again, of really making software more human is very important role. Now, obviously not everybody can build a community, but maybe at least plugging in into somebody's community is quite important as well. And then there's another one, unless you have a question on community.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:46):
No, keep going.

Elena Verna (00:51:48):
Another one is giving your product away a lot. And for AI products, it may feel counterintuitive because they're so costly. Every single interaction with an AI product costs companies something. There's an LLM pass-through cost that is coming through. And a lot of, especially traditional tech companies I see are gating AI immediately behind the paywall because they're sitting on a really cush, high margin profile, and the moment that you start giving AI away for free, you're cutting into those margins like a knife through the butter. Now, at the same time, AI being so new and the capabilities being so new, you have to remove the barrier of entry. You have to give a lot of your product away for free. But by the way, I don't just mean freemium. Freemium to me is just a baseline. If you're in the new category, you need to let people explore what it is free and get that initial wow moment.

(00:52:48):
It's not aha moment, by the way. It doesn't need to be aha moment anymore. It just needs to be a wow moment. And for Lovable, it's that first preview generation after your first prompt, even though it's absolutely not going to be complete thing of what you want to build, but you just go, "This is possible? I had no idea. I want to keep building." And it becomes an addictive exercise.

(00:53:08):
But we also give so many of our Lovable credits away to every event, to every hackathon. If you want to host a Lovable hackathon, we will sponsor it and give all of the participants credits away for free. We give them away as candy and we basically track them over our LLM costs on freemium and giveaways as our marketing costs, and it doesn't go into our something we need to reduce to make our margins better. It goes into, this is something that we need to spend more in because this is part of our growth secret sauce.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:41):
Okay, I want to hear more about the growth secret sauce. That is extremely interesting. I haven't heard of that as a strategy, and I can see why this makes sense. If the strategy is blow people's socks off so they can tell their friends, post on all socials, the trick is get more people to try it. And it's such a new, crazy thing. Why would I pay money? Why would I even go take the effort to try sign up for an account? I don't know what this is. I don't know what I'm doing with it. So I could see how this loop goes faster and faster by giving it away.

Elena Verna (00:54:10):
Exactly. And again, this is very uncomfortable sometimes for companies that A, either used to really... AI companies have lower profile of margins. That's absolutely true. To find an AI company with 80%, 90% margin profile is absolutely impossible, let's be real. We're all sitting somewhere in a 40% or so, which is a lot smaller. So any time that you look at those AI costs as your cost center, that's when you're in trouble. You fundamentally have to flip the script and say, "I need to expose to people of what is possible and I need to remove the monetization friction out of it." Because if you don't, nobody's ever going to try it, or you're going to be very easily overtaken by a competitor that will give it away. And let's face it, once you hook people, they're more likely going to stay with you. So you obviously have to still work on the retention strategy there.

(00:54:59):
But if you can have, like for our case, if somebody, one of our users stands up and say, "Hey, I'm going to have a hackathon at my work on Lovable. Can you give us all some free credits to play with?" Why would we prevent a person who wants to do all of the marketing and activating job for us in their company from using us?

(00:55:21):
Of course, we're like, "Take it. How much do you need? How much would you like? We will sponsor it all. We will give you anything that you need." So we're really leaning into people that are wanting to show this magic to those around you and empowering them as much as possible. And that is something that is actually applies to every single product. And I agree, this is not a growth strategy that I've ever applied in my life on giving product away as much as possible, but it is something that is more and more becoming something that I see that is absolutely non-negotiable.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:51):
What I'm feeling is the more mind-blowing it is, the more you should give it away for free.

Elena Verna (00:55:56):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:57):
Especially in a competitive market where everyone is... It's hard. There's so many companies trying to do this thing, and so it's almost like the better you are, the more you should give it away.

Elena Verna (00:56:07):
Right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:08):
And this also explains why so much VC money has to be raised for these sorts of companies because this is not cheap. Like you said, you're paying all these foundational models a lot of money.

Elena Verna (00:56:16):
Yes and no. I'm only going to say no is because, so take a look at Lovable, we're over 200 million in ARR. At this point, we're 100 people large so our headcount costs are very low.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:28):
Wait, let me just make sure people hear that. 200 million ARR, I didn't realize 100 people work at Lovable.

Elena Verna (00:56:36):
Yes. And six months ago, we had 30 people working at Lovable so we triple. So for us, it's a really big deal. We tripled our company size.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:44):
Such a big company now.

Elena Verna (00:56:44):
We're going to quadruple it by the end of, yeah, I know. We're big boy and girls now. But for perspective of the headcount costs, it's minimal. We have very little in that going on. We are not spending a lot on paid marketing so we're not a big paid marketing driver. Yeah, we're spending on influencer marketing, but it's not majority of our growth. It's low double digits to be fair because it's not why we're successful. It's amplifying our success and it's helping us reach new audiences. We don't have really large sales team, we have only a couple sales folks, and they're just starting to ramp up their enterprise efforts so we don't have really big enterprise demand gen costs as well.

(00:57:24):
From that perspective, if you look at the equation and you say, "Well, okay, if you're not going to do a lot of paid marketing, if you're not going to do a lot of sales, because we're really only working on hand raisers of people that are saying right now that they want to buy Lovable, then whereas you don't have big costs, so you can spend it on product."

(00:57:42):
That is the beautiful part because when we are giving our product away to our customers, we're not competing with other companies in that space, because they're just going to use Lovable in their hackathon. We're on their own, and we're not competing on AdWords or in paid Google where everybody's buying real estate for eyeballs. From that perspective, I think about it more as a shift of where we spend in costs. And honestly, it's more efficient way to do paid marketing almost in a sense because of the cost per eyeball that we get there is quite a bit lower compared to if we were trying to compete it on Google. So yes and no to your statement because it actually does not deteriorate margin profile. We're just shifting of where we're spending it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:30):
That is an incredibly important point you're making there. It's not like you're generating an incredible amount of revenue, so there is money available to spend. And what you're saying is because it's been spreading through word of mouth mostly, you're not spending tons of money on salespeople, you're not spending tons of money on paid ads. This is just an amazing way to get more people to use it, so it's like a marketing cost.

Elena Verna (00:58:54):
This is product-led growth.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:58):
Supercharge.

Elena Verna (00:58:59):
To the max, supercharged. Yes, because you're literally using your product to drive that awareness by giving it away to the agents in your ecosystem that will do that distribution for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:11):
So fascinating. What a wild world we're living in. Free stuff for everyone.

Elena Verna (00:59:17):
Yes. I mean, it's great for consumers. This is a great time to be a consumer. You have so many options. Everybody's throwing themselves at you, giving your product away for free so it's great to be in the market right now. I think the power should be with consumer always, but with software, power has not been with consumer previously because we were forced to use towards some solutions because of either how they were chosen for us or what was available in the market. And now that supply is almost infinite, the demand from the consumers can be very picky and the one that serves the best will win.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:52):
And I think again, it's important to highlight. This is not some kind of VC subsidized bubble-ish sort of thing. There is a lot of money being generated that you are spending to help it grow faster. It's not some kind of, we're just raising more money to give away more money. You're actually making your own money. It's not driven by VC money. Obviously, it helps.

Elena Verna (01:00:09):
I can't comment on specific margin details for us, but at the same time, the money that we're raising on VC is for future development and hardening our business, not because we will not be able to survive without it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:22):
Awesome. Okay, great segue too. I want to talk about product-market fit in competition. You have this really interesting post that I don't think people grasp yet, which is that product-market fit is no longer this, we've done it. Product-market fit and we're up into the right. Now we just grow, go, grow. Now we hire salespeople, it's going to be great. You've written that just product-market fit is no longer this like you've done it and you're good. It's this endless fight to keep it. Talk about what you're seeing there.

Elena Verna (01:00:49):
I'll first start with what I've felt at least before when people were talking about product-market fit, that yeah, obviously always product-market fit is an evolving thing, but the rate of that evolution was measured in years. What is it that you need the next product-market fit step function change, which often was called second horizon or third horizon. Sometimes five, 10 years, sometimes even longer that you'd need, depending on how good and hard your initial product-market fit was, but you'd spend years scaling the original product-market fit. It was like blitz growth stage. Marketing, sales, growth was very important that you just try to get it to as many people as possible. And then once you have saturation or the cost to getting to the marginal people becomes too high, you start thinking, "Okay, what else can I offer to help me reach additional people or sell more to existing users that I already have?"

(01:01:39):
And again, the main point here is it would take years to get to that stage where it became a question that you had to face really hard face-to-face. Now, it's three months, and all of a sudden you have to face that question again. And it's happening because of two things, in my opinion. Number one, in AI technology of what LLM is capable of doing changes still very rapidly with new model release, with each new model release. I think we'll stabilize at some point and then it's going to become more marginal, but we're not there yet. So every three months or so, every single AI LLM provider creates a step function change in what is possible with that LLM. And when you have this new possibility in just an underlying technology that opens up in front of you, then it creates another ceiling of what is possible to build on top of it.

(01:02:36):
The tricky piece here is that it's not enough to just wait for that technology to get better and then start building on top. You have to build beforehand to make a bet and then it's the LLM to catch up because when that model releases, you already need to have that functionality available. That piece is, I've never been in a company where the fundamental capabilities are still changing so rapidly, and that's the product part. The product can leap to the new expectations, but let's not talk about the market part as well. Consumer expectations have never changed this fast before. What we expected ChatGPT to be able to do and answer and how we wanted it to talk to us eight months ago versus now is night and day and the deep thinking mode, and how deeply you can go into answering questions and what is capable of building on top of it.

(01:03:31):
Consumer perception has never changed this fast too. It's this unprecedented time of consumers all of a sudden in a month saying, "Oh, it's not doing this yet. I'm bouncing."

(01:03:43):
Before, again, consumer perceptions would be years to take. It's actually technology would sometimes be able to already address it, but consumer perception has not been changed yet so it would take a long time. We're in this really weird part where both product and market is shifting so rapidly that every three months, I feel like we have to recapture our product-market fit and not just recapture on the same technology and with same customers. It's both of those pieces of the equation change every three months, and it's terrifying in a way. It's also very confusing in a way because we're $200 million company, and we're not solely focused on marketing and sales because we still have to recapture our product-market fit.

(01:04:26):
You know that the team that finds your product-market fit is very different than the team that usually scales your company, yet we have to find the team that is capable of doing both on ongoing basis. Now, I think every AI company is on this product-market fit treadmill. Hopefully that treadmill speed slows down. If not, I think we're going to come up with crazy things of what this LLM and AI will be able to do if it's going to continue at this cusp, but it's a weird place to be in because every three months we have to throttle on our scaling efforts and just reinvent and then scale again. But it's like short blitz of growth, not these long year long commitments.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:09):
What makes this very real is just this week, apparently OpenAI had this whole code red moment where even though OpenAI by far the leading AI assistant over almost a billion, I think monthly active users, basically synonymous with AI around the world, with Gemini 3 launching, their market share just started to dip really quickly. I think they lost six something percent in a week. And so even OpenAI, ChatGPT, the original, the one that everyone uses constantly is in danger.

Elena Verna (01:05:39):
It's like nobody's future is bulletproof yet. And 10 years ago, if you asked me if a $200 million company was at risk in losing product-market fit in the next three months if it's experiencing 10% month-over-month growth, I would've said, "You're crazy." And now that's the reality that we live in. And I don't know, it's fascinating to world in. What a time to be alive.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:04):
Time to be alive and very stressful, but the prize at the end is massive. That's why this is worth doing, not just monetarily, but just the impact it's going to have on the world, the way we people build and ship.

Elena Verna (01:06:17):
Exactly. The ceiling of what is possible has been raised so massively that we haven't even became too closest to even see it, I believe. I think that that's the exciting part of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:29):
The way I've seen you write about this product-market fit challenge is the traditional approach is you have these core users that are using it happy with it, and then you expand to the adjacent users and expand to the next. You're basically just trying to recapture that same core constantly and don't even have time to go adjacent.

Elena Verna (01:06:44):
Yeah. Bangaly wrote a really wonderful article. It was many years ago at this point on adjacent user theory in that your product-market fit expansion when you're in no growth stages, the biggest opportunity for you to go after is this what you call the adjacent user, which are just outside of your core user. They have somewhat similar needs, but maybe they're in different geo, maybe they have slightly different use case, slightly different needs. And your biggest way to continue growing a product-market fit without having to go to next horizon is to capture that next group of users. The interesting piece here of how I relate to it, we still have the core users. And by the way, those core users are mostly pioneers right now that are excited by the capabilities. Then there's latent majority that is filled with adjacent users. And the issue right now, which I'm actually quite worried about us as a category is that we're constantly focusing on recapturing the pioneers.

(01:07:39):
We don't have time to go after adjacent users, and I'm worried of whether there's going to be a gap in the space where we actually going to alienate the latent majority because we're so hyper focused on just staying top of mind and top capabilities on the pioneers. But I don't know the right answer here, because without the pioneers, you need pioneers for latent majority to follow. But if you take pioneers and you take them too far into capabilities, will latent majority never be able to catch up? Maybe this is a fruitless concern, but it's just something that I think about because at this stage we should be working on adjacent users. I would argue maybe OpenAI definitely started to do that with how many people they have on their platform, but not most of the other AI companies.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:31):
I completely see what you're thinking there. A brand could just become known as that's just for startups and prototyping and it's not for serious work.

Elena Verna (01:08:38):
Yeah, or it's for techies. It's for tech people. It never actually enters the people outside of our little bubble that we live in.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:50):
We touched on this a little bit of just working in AI, working on AI companies, challenging, stressful, a lot of work. What's your advice for folks that are thinking about, should I join a Lovable? Should I join a Cursor? Should I-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:00):
... are thinking about, "Should I join a Lovable? Should I join a Cursor? Should I just go work at Google?"

(01:09:05):
Not to throw them under the bus or anything. Although Google, very, very successful in AI now, maybe a less AI-focused company.

Elena Verna (01:09:13):
I really believe that there's different... You need to understand what's the environment that is right for you. Just please understand that AI companies are very hectic at the moment. They're very unstable by definition of that product-market fit treadmill, about that distribution of how they're actually distribute to the market, really changing about how product is even being developed in the first place. So if you are very comfortable in being in that messy middle and really comfortable of converting chaos into clarity for you and those around you, then yeah, AI company is a wonderful place for you to really absorb new skill sets right now. Because even before joining Lovable, when I kept seeing AI, I'm like, "My gosh, I'm so tired of seeing AI everywhere. Is it really changing the world? Is it really changing the way people work?"

(01:10:02):
And I was at Dropbox before, and yeah, we would use AI here and there and I would use ChatGPT. I've never used AI there the way I use AI at Lovable and the things that I'm capable of accomplishing at Lovable, and I don't know if I ever would've made that leap so fast unless I joined Lovable. If I would've just read or listened about it, it's just different compared to be surrounded by people where it's expectation. It's not like a nice-to-have or something that somebody's asking you to do. This is just how you get things done. And you have to think about everything of, "What can AI do here versus where do I add value versus in a traditional sense of work?" because I start with my own value and then I augment it with AI. And here, the mindset has completely shifted.

(01:10:47):
Now, I don't think AI is replacing everybody's job, so please don't look at it as that cliche saying. I actually often call AI as average intelligence that helps me get the platform up. And then I add my human thinking and my human creativity on top of it to get it to the next level. But at least I can get this base level done with AI really freaking quickly.

(01:11:11):
So from that perspective, I think if you want to leapfrog on what it means to be AI native employee and how to use all of these AI tools, you should go to AI company. But if you know that your superpower is in more structure and more definition and a really high specialty of things, because in AI companies, they're all fairly small, so you'll have to generalize quite a bit and have a lot of ownership, all of areas that you usually maybe not have ownership over, then you shouldn't join it, because AI companies will evolve to be more stable too.

(01:11:43):
So it's just a matter of time on where you can join. So I would just urge people to look at their superpowers and the type of environments that really speak to them so they can feel happy, because this can lead to burnout for wrong type of personalities very quickly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:00):
Yeah. My sense is if you want work-life balance, don't join one of these companies, because that's just not the way they work.

Elena Verna (01:12:07):
I don't know if I'd go that far. I mean, I have family, I have two kids. I feel like I have a very good work-life balance, but I put in boundaries for myself. I know when I need time off because I know when my brain starts to overheat, so to speak. But I also know that work is my hobby and it's my passion, and this is the best work of my life that I'm doing right now. There's no other place that I'd rather be than to be here.

(01:12:33):
So I think that you just need to be more careful about setting your own boundaries that you know you need. But I mean, let's face it, I don't think anybody has work-life balance, regardless of a company that they work at, even at Google or Microsoft or any of the others. I think everybody's freaking out and running as fast as they can, it's just they're running it in different structures.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:58):
I'm really glad you said that and corrected me there, that it is possible to work at a company, one of, if not the fastest-growing company in history and actually have work-life balance to get sleep, to spend time with your kids and family.

Elena Verna (01:13:11):
You just have to protect it ruthlessly, but you also need to be realistic with how much is expected out of you, and you need to feel confident that you'll be able to deliver it. And by the way, you won't be able to deliver it unless you use AI in many aspects of your work life. So that's the piece that helps you actually get to hit those expectations of outcomes that you need to do and the velocity. But I'm very protective of my personal time with kids. Why did I have children if I'm not going to spend time with them? So those are part of the non-negotiables that I bring along with me in every single work.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:47):
For people that maybe have trouble setting boundaries or just not good at this, anything, what works for you? Is it as easy as just telling people, "Here's where I need to leave"? What advice do you have for people to set boundaries like that?

Elena Verna (01:13:59):
So first of all, I would not think about it as a work-life balance. There's no such thing as balance. So balance feels like, "Oh, I have enough time for everything."

(01:14:05):
I don't have enough time for anything, but I prioritize my family in some moments, I prioritize work in other moments, and I don't try to balance the two. I go where I'm needed and where I go, and I feel like I'm not going to regret the choices that I'm making today. So I'm constantly trying to put myself in the future and say, "Will I resent myself if I make this choice right now?" And if the answer is yes, I don't make that choice.

(01:14:29):
And sometimes I have to say no to Anton and say, "I can't make it," or, "I won't be there. I need to be here with my family," or, "Today I need to cancel my day. My kid is sick and he needs me, and I need to take him to the doctor."

(01:14:43):
So I think that just making in the moment, in every day, when sometimes in-the-hour decisions, to me, works better than trying to balance something that is completely unachievable and it feels overwhelming to even think about. But I prioritize this in my sleep, my health, my workout schedule, my kids, my family, my husband, and just my downtime because I know that I'm most creative once I have separation from work, because then I come in with all cylinders firing and I have so many more ideas about it. So to me, it's actually part of doing my best work is to take time off.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:18):
That is really great advice. I want to touch on what it's like to work at Lovable because it feels like Lovable is at the cutting edge of what working in product is going to be. So you mentioned a little bit about how you're always talking to AI, asking questions. Is there any other kind of anecdotes of just how people operate at Lovable that is really unique or weird or funny or interesting that might be helpful for people to try in their company?

Elena Verna (01:15:43):
Yeah. I mean, we use Lovable at Lovable a lot. All of our internal tools are built on Lovables. We actually have our first hackathon on Lovable happening next week, where our entire company is just going to take full day to vibe code and see what we actually have happen. We prototype everything on Lovable. So our specs, yeah, we do still have a written spec, but it always accompanied by a lovable prototype that everybody can interact with and to click around with and provide feedback. And everybody bunches in and also does some edits if they have any better ideas.

(01:16:16):
So I create mocks on Lovable. So for example, we need to make some pricing changes, or pricing page changes. I take a screenshot of our pricing page. I go to Lovable as I recreate this pricing page, make these changes, and then I send that to my engineering team saying, "Hey, this is what I want to happen." And then they take it from there.

(01:16:37):
And ChatGPT, I use a lot for brainstorming, especially the deep thinking mode. I love it. It takes a long time, but it's so worth it. Sometimes it has crazy ideas. Sometimes it was like, "Yeah, this is nothing new to me." So it's not interesting, but it gets me thinking and it gives me a look at the different angles.

(01:16:56):
And I use Granola a lot, for example, because to me, it's super helpful to get AI summaries of the meetings and it's very powerful for me. I use Wispr Flow a lot because I feel like I have no time to type anymore. So I just talk to my phone and talk to my laptop all the time in order to do it. But we're even thinking about all of the customer support automations that are done through AI. Every single aspect of what we do, question is asked, what can AI do here first, and then how we can add ourselves into the equation.

(01:17:33):
But Lovable for us, having unlimited credits at Lovable is a pretty awesome perk, I have to say. I sometimes have to pinch myself. I'm like, "I get paid to vibe code." It looks so fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:46):
Feel like that engineer, that vibe code engineer, he's actually getting paid to vibe code.

Elena Verna (01:17:48):
He has my dream job. I want his job.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:50):
Yeah, exactly. Exactly.

Elena Verna (01:17:51):
Yeah, I got into the wrong line profession here.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:55):
Oh, man. Okay. Is there anything else about Lovable? Because what I think about, actually, I interviewed the Perplexity founders back in the day years ago. Before we talked to anyone for advice, we first asked ChatGPT, and I was just like, "That is the most insane thing I've ever heard. How can you possibly work that way?"

(01:18:11):
And now that's how everyone works. And so I'm curious, I don't know how Anton works. Is there anyone else that's just way in the future of here's how things might be?

Elena Verna (01:18:19):
So for me, especially for product and growth, and even marketing in some capacity, when I have an idea in my head, it sounds so freaking cool. And sometimes I put it on paper and it's like, "Ah, we need to do it."

(01:18:34):
And then I go and try to vibe code it, and I'm like, "Oh, I don't see the magic anymore," or I can't envision it anymore.

(01:18:43):
Or sometimes I'm like, "Yeah. Yeah," and there's more, there's more. So to me, it actually has helped really complete the ideation process for me quite a bit, because then I actually try to go and build it, and it breaks down some of the elements of what's important, what's not. So it's taking me on a product development lifecycle so much further down. And then it creates a much better communication vehicle with my engineers too, because I then can tell them exactly what's important and whatnot.

(01:19:12):
So to me, it's been great because sometimes we envision things that are so much better than the reality. And before, until it hands it off to design, designers would do it for us and try to make it awesome versus I often stop my ideas in tracks super early on without pushing it forward. Versus other times I might've pushed it for too far too long, even through design queue or even pitching to leadership. And I find that very powerful because it calibrates me really quickly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:44):
Awesome. Okay. Last question. I want to talk about something that you've written about that I think it's a really important topic, something that we should surface, is you wrote this post called I'm Worried About Women In Tech. Talk about what you're seeing here, what you're noticing, what you think might be going in the wrong direction.

Elena Verna (01:20:00):
Yeah. There's actually conflicting data points about how women... You're talking about women, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:00):
Yeah, women in tech.

Elena Verna (01:20:06):
Women in tech? Yeah, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:06):
Yeah.

Elena Verna (01:20:07):
There's conflicting data points about how women are keeping up with AI technology and wave, because there's a bunch of reports that has been done that show massive gap between women adopting AI versus men adopting AI, which points the story that men are just widening the gap of accessibility for technology. And whoever's adopting AI right now is getting paid the most, gets the most opportunities. I mean, we're seeing insane acqui-hires right now, where people are getting paid more for their talent than for the companies that they've created. And that's a really interesting trend that is occurring, and a lot of it is fueled on this wave of AI.

(01:20:47):
And women are not really present there. If you can think about one million-dollar acqui-hire that has been in the news that is a woman, I can't think of one. If you look at AI companies and their CEOs, most of it is men. If you look at the company's composition in AI companies, it's mostly men. To me, this really came to the head of when I came to Lovable, and I'm like, "It's pink, it's purple brand. It's a heart. It's lovable." I'm like, "I'm sure this is where it's 50/50 men versus a woman."

(01:21:20):
And although we don't collect this information, but just through third-party autofill, we saw it's like 20% at most. And I'm like, "What is happening? Not again. Why is this, again, not being adopted by a woman?"

(01:21:35):
And obviously I don't know all of the answers. I think that this is early on that we can shortcut it. And by the way, I also don't want to put this as a indication that men are to blame because I think men are doing wonderful job really spearheading the horizons and showing us what's possible and leading the charge. I'm just afraid that so many women are stuck in that latent majority that is just not catching up. And my worry is that it's going to affect the hireable talent. It's going to step us back again in the composition of the workplace, of the diversity. And maybe it matters, maybe it doesn't, like whichever side that you sit on. But I think that it needs to be built for everybody in the world, and for that, it needs to be built by a representative sample of people that are behind the product as well.

(01:22:23):
So I just find it fascinating that even when the barrier to building has been lowered versus you don't need computer science degree, which I appreciate there's not that many women that are getting. We're still seeing the gaping gap on the adoption between genders, which, I don't know, there's something very frustrating about that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:50):
Yeah. The thing that struck with me from your post is there has been a lot of progress being made in the last decade, and now AI is just kind of turning it all back, turning it all around.

Elena Verna (01:23:00):
Hopefully not. I think that we're early on enough that we can bridge the gap. I think sometimes women just need space and ability to discover it, and that's what we're doing at Lovable. We have this initiative, SheBuilds, where we create a hackathon for women only and we give them unlimited access to Lovable for 48 hours, and they come together as a community and they build together. And there's beautiful things that start to come out of it, which I've never anticipated before. But so many women in that hackathon for us build help with their elderly parents or with their kids or with the household or for their church group or for the kids' basketball team solutions, which have hyper-local, hyper-relevant, very needed for what they need in their life and something that was never been able to build before because of how expensive software was, because it would never going to become potentially a hundred-million-dollar companies, but it also doesn't need to be anymore.

(01:24:01):
So I just want to bring women to build more and vibe code more so we can have more diversity in software that is even created because I think that we all have a unique take on what problems that we can solve, and I want everybody's voices to be heard.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:17):
I'll give the URL for SheBuilds. I pulled it up while you're talking, shebuilds.lovable.app.

Elena Verna (01:24:23):
It's fully vibe coded on Lovable.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:23):
That's so cool.

Elena Verna (01:24:25):
Is there a minimum viable product?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:27):
Minimal Lovable product.

Elena Verna (01:24:28):
Minimal Lovable product.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:29):
There it is. So when is this happening? Is this December 15th, 18th? Oh, yeah, it's coming up.

Elena Verna (01:24:33):
Yeah, we're running it constantly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:36):
Cool.

Elena Verna (01:24:36):
So our next cohort starts December 15th, but we're going to have more.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:36):
Now or never. Sweet.

Elena Verna (01:24:41):
We're planning a massive one on International Women's Day. So that's the one that if you can, come join us.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:48):
Awesome. Okay, so some glimmer of hope. I don't know if you saw this tweet where I tagged you the other day, or maybe it was today. I was looking at my most recent podcast video performance, and the top four are all women and they're all AI-oriented. And they're above Stewart Butterfield, founder of Slack, above Gamma's CEO, Grant, so maybe a glimmer of hope.

Elena Verna (01:25:10):
Yeah, absolutely. I think there's lots of glimmers of hope. I think we can just all lean in and make sure that nobody's left behind in this wave. And that's not to stop people that are marching ahead. This is just to open up opportunities for everybody around us.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:25):
Awesome. And we'll link to that post if people want to get a deeper perspective, what you're saying. Elena, is there anything else that you wanted to share? Is there anything else you want to remind people of before we get to your one-question lightning round?

Elena Verna (01:25:38):
I guess the only other thing that I will share is for AI companies when it comes to hiring. It's really interesting, also, kind of the shift in the type of personas that end up being hired that I see. For me, at least it's quite different compared to anywhere that I worked before. And that is, there's this narrative going in the market always that new hires, sorry, new grads have no jobs in the market left because all of the entry-level jobs are automated.

(01:26:07):
I actually think that's quite false, because new grads, especially AI-native new grads... So it's very important for kids that are entering into the, I shouldn't say kids, young adults that are entering into the workforce that they really know AI, which there's another really big issue that our schools are not teaching AI students. So this is something else that we need to fix as a category, because otherwise we're literally setting up our young for a complete failure. But I think it's incredible to see some of those new graduates come in and what they're capable of doing.

(01:26:43):
We have multiple new graduates at Lovable that are working, and I learned so much from them. And you need to obviously have the right atmosphere where people with experience, like a old guard like me, that can look at the new guard and really hear them and see them and really change the way that I operate based on how they do things. So make sure that you bring some of that fresh talent that doesn't understand any of the baggage that we came from and that can really look at the future in technology and what can unlock from a completely new lens. So highly recommend putting those into your team as little fireballs that are going to be sometimes hard to contain but can start the best initiatives for you forward.

(01:27:32):
And then it's also interesting that there's a really high demand for ex-founders now, for those people that truly have a lot of agency and high autonomy. So instead of just having people that have been working in the corporate world, the failed startup founders are now hot demand for a lot of these AI companies. So these personas that we traditionally would not prioritize in companies to hire are now becoming the hottest commodity and the highest-going talent, which I think is fascinating and is the wonderful thing that is changing how the culture inside operates.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:09):
That is really interesting and really empowering, just this idea that if you need grad, there's hope. You're not going to be out of a job.

Elena Verna (01:28:09):
Absolutely. Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:16):
And you might have an advantage. Yeah.

Elena Verna (01:28:18):
You have to lead with that. That's the thing. You have to lead with the things that you are capable of achieving, knowing what you have with AI, because that is a lot of people. Especially in traditional tech or in more traditional companies, they're looking for somebody to show them because it's really hard to figure it out on your own versus coming in and seeing and then copying.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:37):
Well, Elena, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Because it's your fourth time, I'm not going to ask you all the questions I always ask you. So I'm just going to ask you one question. So Lovable is based in Stockholm, Sweden. I'm curious, just what's something you love about Stockholm that you weren't expecting? Is there a food, a restaurant? I don't know, something.

Elena Verna (01:28:55):
Well, you always have to say Swedish meatballs. I mean, I've never liked meatballs before, and now it's so good here. It's so good. So every time, one of my meals here throughout the day involves it. But I actually really love their-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:11):
It sounds really good. I actually haven't yet.

Elena Verna (01:29:14):
Yeah. I don't know, they just taste different and they're-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:16):
And they smell like the Ikea. It's not like the Ikea Swedish meatballs.

Elena Verna (01:29:19):
Well, I have been to Ikea here, because that is a Swedish company too. It reminded me of in-person Amazon. It was absolutely incredible. Ikea here is next level. But food, Swedish meatballs for sure. Honestly, how clean the city is, it's kind of incredible. The architecture, everything is so built out. It's picture perfect like it's on a card. I don't know. It's different compared to most of the large cities that I've been at that are little bit more worn down.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:49):
So fun. Makes me want to visit and get some meatballs.

Elena Verna (01:29:54):
Yeah, and visit during the summer. Otherwise, the daylight here-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:54):
During the summer? Okay.

Elena Verna (01:29:56):
... is really tight during the winter.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:59):
Okay. Good tip. Okay. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, maybe learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Elena Verna (01:30:06):
Yes. Please find me online on LinkedIn. Please feel free to follow me. Always engage on my post if you want to engage with me because that's the place that I always talk to people. I have my newsletter as well that baby steps compared to what Lenny has, but it's elenaverna.com. That's where I post most of my findings that I experience at my work. So if you want to continue seeing how my thinking evolves or the patterns that I notice, that's where to find me.

(01:30:35):
And how to be useful to me? Really pressure test my thinking because so many things are changing right now. I'm honestly not even sure myself of what is a pattern versus what is just a data point. So I'd love to just engage in as many conversations as possible and hear your opinions because that will help us as an industry just understand what is actually happening and makes more sense out of this whole thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:59):
I'm just going to double click on your newsletter. Definitely subscribe to it. It's incredibly good. Everything we've talked about here, Elena has written about in her newsletter in large part and goes even deeper. It's just elenaverna.com. If you're reading this on your podcast app or YouTube, you could just look at her name and just type it .com and you'll find it, and subscribe and you'll be really happy.

(01:31:17):
Elena, thank you so much for being here. This was amazing, everything I wanted it to be. Thank you for sharing. I know you have a lot of work to do, so I appreciate you making time for this and for joining us.

Elena Verna (01:31:26):
Thank you for having me. Really appreciate you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:29):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
You've noticed a significant shift in how SEO works with the rise of AI answers being integrated into search results.

Eli Schwartz (00:00:06):
Transparently, I thought this was going to be an apocalypse. Up until AI Overviews, whoever won on that long form piece of content would get that first click. But now that doesn't exist anymore.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:15):
What should people do to be successful in this new paradigm?

Eli Schwartz (00:00:19):
Think of SEO as a product. The product managers are the people that should be thinking about this SEO question because it's a product question. Product people need to think about how do we position this to the user that is not going to find out about this from a social channel, that's not going to be attracted by an ad? This is a user that's doing their own self-discovery journey. If you can't answer the question about what is it that someone's going to do a search on, then don't do SEO.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:44):
To a lot of people, SEO is kind of this dark art.

Eli Schwartz (00:00:45):
It is not a dark art. It is simple. I think step one is the step that almost everyone misses on SEO, which is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:57):
Today my guest is Eli Schwartz. Eli is a growth advisor specializing in SEO and has helped companies like Quora, Coinbase, Tinder, LinkedIn, WordPress, and Zapier develop and execute their SEO strategies. He's also the author of Product-Led SEO and has a very refreshing take on how to think about SEO and win at SEO. Recently, he's been spending a lot of his time analyzing how SEO changes with the rise of LLM chatbots, Google giving you the answers straight in the search results, and also how to utilize AI in your SEO strategy.

(00:01:31):
In this episode, we dive deep into everything that you need to know to be successful in this new AI paradigm. As Eli shares in the conversation, Google is just now rolling out changes to how search works and is greatly increasing how many searches include an AI-generated answer at the top of the search results. So things are going to start shifting under our feed pretty quickly. If you're at all thinking about SEO, working on SEO, or are just curious about how search is evolving, this episode is for you.

(00:01:58):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Eli Schwartz. Eli, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Eli Schwartz (00:02:16):
It's a real honor to be here. You've had some amazing guests, and I'm honored to be counted as one of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:21):
It's completely my honor. You've been working on SEO for a long time. You've been helping companies figure out how to win at SEO for a long time, over a decade. And we were chatting about what's happening in SEO, and you told me that you've noticed a significant shift in how SEO works with the rise of LLMs, with the rise of AI answers being integrated into search results.

(00:02:43):
And so I thought it'd be awesome just to spend an entire episode talking about what people need to know about what's changing in SEO and how to be successful in this new paradigm of SEO with LLMs and AI being prevalent. How does that sound to you?

Eli Schwartz (00:02:57):
That's an awesome idea. I really like what's happening with AI in general for SEO because it's causing everyone that cares about SEO traffic, whether that's a PM or that's a CMO or that's a CEO, to really be forced into pivoting their thinking about what SEO traffic means because the tactics around SEO haven't really changed. It's always been the exact same thing.

(00:03:23):
My last full-time job was out at SurveyMonkey, and I was moonlighting on the side. And I was introduced to a CEO of a big company and they were asking me about my approach to SEO. And I wanted to close it. I wanted to get this consulting engagement. And the CEO says to me, "So essentially what you're telling me is I need to find my keywords, put that into content, and then build some links. Is there anything else you're going to do for me? Why should I pay you?"

(00:03:47):
And it stunned me into silence because essentially that is and was SEO, and then that forced me to really pivot my thinking around what SEO might be. And I pivoted my thinking and I've worked with many companies around how they should think about SEO and what SEO traffic should mean, but others have not because those tactics did work. And LLMs and AI in general is forcing people to think again, how should SEO work? How should I be driving business from the search channel?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:22):
This episode is brought to you by Pendo, the only all-in-one product experience platform for any type of application. Tired of bouncing around multiple tools to uncover what's really happening inside your product? With all the tools you need in one simple-to-use platform, Pendo makes it easy to answer critical questions about how users are engaging with your product and then turn those insights into action. Also, you can get your users to do what you actually want them to do.

(00:04:48):
First, Pendo is built around product analytics, seeing what your users are actually doing in your apps so that you can optimize their experience. Next, Pendo lets you deploy in-app guides that lead users through the actions that matter most. Then, Pendo integrates user feedback so that you can capture and analyze what people actually want. And the new thing in Pendo, session replays, a very cool way to visualize user sessions.

(00:05:12):
I'm not surprised at all that over 10,000 companies use it today. Visit pendo.io/lenny to create your free Pendo account today and start building better experiences across every corner of your product. P.S. You want to take your product-led know-how a step further? Check out Pendo's lineup of free certification courses led by top product experts and designed to help you grow and advance in your career. Learn more and experience the power of the Pendo platform today at pendo.io/lenny.

(00:05:46):
This episode is brought to you by Brave Search. Brave Search is the private independent search engine that doesn't bias or sensor results. Brave Search and its answers with AI feature are for free to all users on desktop and mobile devices. With Brave Search, you get real answers faster served from their own independent index of the web. Their AI search engine can give lightning fast, incredibly accurate results for almost any question. But Brave isn't just AI answers.

(00:06:15):
It's also a powerful traditional search engine with real innovations versus big tech options. It fights bias and SEO spam. It brings a cleaner results page with fewer ads, Reddit threads in the search engine results page, powerful local results, and even community- driven ranking options. Tired of big tech's same old list of links? It's time to try Brave Search. Visit brave.com/lenny to get started. That's brave.com/lenny. So just to set a little foundation, talk about just what is it that's changing in search and in SEO with the rise of AI answers and LLMs.

Eli Schwartz (00:06:52):
So essentially Google and other tech companies had their hand forced by OpenAI and ChatGPT. Google claims to have invented the concept of LLMs and they may or may not have, and some of the early OpenAI employees were Google employees. But ChatGPT came on the scene at the end of 2022 with this ability to ask any question and then get a written out answer. And suddenly people are like, well, I don't need a Google and click all these results.

(00:07:19):
So there started this conversation of you don't need Google anymore. Google is ending. Even more than that, you don't need SEO. You don't need to optimize anything because the entire world will just be given to you. We'll dig into that. I don't think that's at all correct, and I don't think anyone, whether you're doing SEO as your full-time job or whether you're receiving SEO traffic as a part of one of your primary marketing channels, I don't think anybody has to worry about that.

(00:07:47):
However, Google was worried about it, and I think one of Google's primary stakeholders is really Wall Street. So if Wall Street suddenly thinks that Google is a has-been company and they're not interesting anymore and they don't want to maintain investments in them, their stock price goes down. And that hurts Google's ability to recruit employees. It hurts Google's ability to raise money and invest in all the interesting stuff they do.

(00:08:11):
So Google has to satisfy the curiosity and the interests of the general world and general investor by saying, "Oh, that OpenAI thing, we can do it too. That's not that big of a deal." So then Google responded, badly, of course, first, by launching what was then Bard. So they said, "ChatGPT, look, we've got our own version," and they did a public demo. It didn't work out well at all and their stock price actually went down.

(00:08:37):
And then they fixed it and then their stock price went up. But they also had to have an answer to this concept of, is search dying? Does anyone need to search anymore when the entire world can just be given to you? So they launched what at the time they called SGE, Search Generative Experience, which is essentially ChatGPT in a search result. So they launched that, but they launched it as a beta.

(00:09:01):
And there were huge issues with what they were doing there because there's monetization issues. Everything they do comes from ads. The majority of their revenue comes from ads. So if you're going to show this AI answer on a search result, then you also can't have ads. You need to go all in on one of them. That was one issue which they actually have not solved yet. Another issue they had was liability.

(00:09:26):
So if they have a generative response that tells you to do something awful, like I think there was one where it may or may not have been fake, a lot of people made some fake ones, that told you to jump off the Golden Gate Bridge. Are there liability concerns? Because Google now is the publisher. They're not a search engine that told you how to find out the answer to that.

(00:09:43):
They told you to do it themselves. And the third issue there, which is another liability concern, is it plagiarism? So those are the things that they worried about. So they took about a year to test this thing, which was fascinating because we're tech people and most of the listeners are tech people. Google is very much a launch fast kind of company. They reveal something and then it sort of rolls out very, very quickly.

(00:10:07):
They're not the kind of company that says we're going to launch something and then they take a year to do it. So AI Overviews, what was then called Search Generative Experience, launched at Google I/O this past year, in May of this past year, and they renamed it to AI Overviews. And it's that. It's essentially ChatGPT in a search assault. They launched it to great fanfare.

(00:10:27):
Of course, it was live right away. They said it was only going to be logged in users only in the US. Obviously they always have concerns about launching things in Europe, because Europe's a little bit more litigious than the US. And once they launched it, suddenly they started getting these screenshots of Google told me to jump off the Golden Gate Bridge, Google told me to put glue on my pizza, which, of course, Google didn't do that.

(00:10:50):
They just crawled things from around the web. I'm surprised that Google didn't predict that because the exact same thing happened with ChatGPT and Google is much bigger and a much more interesting target for people that want to share those things in social media. So Google launches it, and that was a little bit embarrassing, so they rolled it back somewhat.

(00:11:07):
But what's even more interesting is they've given up on this rollback. Or not given up, they've gone back into it and they've relaunched it, and now it's on so many more search results. I'm seeing it on most of the search results that I see. And on top of that, non-logged in users are seeing it, so in incognito users or users without any history with Google are seeing it, and they've just launched it in the UK. So this thing is coming and it's really going to be affecting search results.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:34):
To maybe help people understand why this may impact SEO, if it's not obvious, is it pushes results down. People get the answer right there. They don't have to click your links. And then there's also the sponsored links at the top of the page that already are pushing you down. So basically your stuff is harder and harder to find, right?

Eli Schwartz (00:11:54):
Actually, it's not that it's harder to find, your stuff becomes less relevant. And that's the part about SEO that I'm excited about. So SEO was exactly like that CEO said to me years ago, it's just about creating some content. And then it's just this race to the top of getting your ranking results on that top keyword. So years ago, I worked at a startup where we were in the automotive space and we wrote content about cars.

(00:12:19):
And a word we liked to rank on was cars. The homepage was ranked for the word cars. We bought tons of links, and we were just a cars website. Obviously that's not something anybody could expect to do now because you don't search like that. You don't search, "Oh, I need to buy a vehicle. I'm going to use the word cars and see what comes up," because cars means a lot of things. Cars is a movie. Cars is a kind of car you drive. Cars could be a go-kart. It could be a lot of things.

(00:12:46):
So no one's going to think about those search results. However, SEO is still geared towards those top of funnel, those big keywords that people cared the most about. So now a lot of those keywords are going to be moving into these AI Overviews. I don't want to just focus on Google, although I think Google's going to own the entire search page forever, at least for a very long time.

(00:13:07):
But other engines, whether it's Perplexity or whether it's Claude or whether it's Meta, they all have this opportunity to give AI Overview type responses. That I think, those top of funnel kind of queries, are a great fit for what's going to come out as an answer. So if you're looking to go on vacation and you want a beach vacation, you can ask a very explicit question about give me a beach vacation that is not in America, but is a two-hour flight from X airport.

(00:13:34):
That's the kind of thing that you could do in a Google search, but would take you a very long time to do. And those are great answers from just getting a paragraph. And then from there, you move into the mid-funnel. So now you do this query and Google suggests to you that you should go to Cancun. Or sorry, not Google, but whatever that answer is suggests to you that you should go to Cancun. And now you're in the mid-funnel and that's where SEO begins to matter.

(00:13:59):
So the reason why I think this disruption is so big is because the journey changes, the discovery changes. So whereas before if you were a travel site and you were able to rank on best beach vacation within two hours of the United States, that's your ranking result. And then you have your long piece of content and you have your ads and you can monetize that.

(00:14:21):
That all changes when you can still rank number one on that, but you're all the way at the bottom of the page. The AI answer, whoever that's from, whether it's again from ChatGPT or Google, tells you where to now start doing your deeper search.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:35):
So just to maybe mirror back what you're saying is the discovery step of search is going to be swallowed up by LLMs that give you direction. And then once you have a sense of what you want, then you go back to Google and that's where potentially the opportunity continues to remain.

Eli Schwartz (00:14:55):
Absolutely, and I think that's where things are good. That's where I'm excited by the user experience for search, because I don't think the user was best served by, I don't know, U.S. News or Forbes writing out where the best beach vacations are within two hours of the United States, with that piece of content that was written by a freelancer who's not a travel expert.

(00:15:17):
So now you're going to get that information also from not a travel expert. You're going to get an AI summarized answer, and that will give you more clues and more ideas to do a deeper research search. I think that's where the user's best served.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:31):
Okay, this is fascinating. Let's definitely spend more time there so people understand exactly what that means. Before we get into that and what people should do to win here, what impact have you seen on SEO and search results and the space of SEO as these things have rolled out? Have you seen numbers of like, this is declining, this is growing?

Eli Schwartz (00:15:51):
Transparently, I thought this was going to be an apocalypse. So I shared about a year ago that it's going to be an apocalypse. We have not seen it yet, and a lot of people are declaring victory that there's no apocalypse because we have not seen it yet. However, this thing just launched in a way that I think it will start impacting traffic.

(00:16:07):
So prior to the last couple weeks, it was not available on logged out search. It was only on logged in search. And even more than that, on that logged in search, Google had rolled it back significantly because of those embarrassing things that happened in May and June when they first launched it. They're only just now launching it broader. And I do think we're going to see impacts.

(00:16:27):
Of course, another challenge with pinpointing and impacts is they're rolling algorithm updates that are happening, which we'll also talk about, and that will mask what's happening. Because if you've been hit by an algo update and suddenly you recover from the algo update, you'll see more traffic, but you might have seen more traffic but on a lower base because these AI Overviews are changing things.

(00:16:48):
So I think if you take all those steps back and you look at this from a journey perspective, there's no way that it won't be impacting search. It's just going to be hard to find. And there'll be certain examples where it is extremely prevalent, and there'll be others where it won't impact things at all. And I think the riding line is the journey. We're in the funnel that user is.

(00:17:09):
So if you are WebMD and you're writing content about the human body, just generic content that has existed since medical journals were created, AI Overviews are going to be fantastic at giving you that answer. You have a headache and you're just like, "Well, this headache's not going away. Should I take more Advil or should I take a nap?"

(00:17:29):
And then you find that WebMD article and you get to page six and it tells you that 0.2% of people that have a headache actually have a brain tumor, and you don't need that anymore because Google can tell you you're good, you should take a nap and drink some more water.

(00:17:43):
WebMD was competing with Healthline and other, Cleveland Clinic and Dallas Clinic and all these other hospitals, and it's totally unnecessary to go and look at all these results and go through six pages of information about headaches. So a site like that will be impacted by AI Overviews. An e-commerce site, maybe not. It depends where in the funnel that user is.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:07):
As you're talking, I was reminded of something that I forgot about with my own experience. I used to have a website called whenishanukkahthisyear.com, because it changes every year and it's just the date. That was the whole website. It gives you the date of Hanukkah this year. And I put ads on there and made 10 bucks a year, and then Google came in and just gave you freaking answers right inside the search result. So I've experienced this.

Eli Schwartz (00:18:30):
So it's even more than that. So what you are referencing is structured data. So that's a very easy thing for Google to tell you when is Hanukkah in 150 years from now? It's in a data set. What's happening now is Google's taking this unstructured data from content and building it into structured data. So you could ask a question of what is the likelihood of a baby needing to go to the hospital because they're showing this sort of symptom.

(00:18:57):
And again, instead of reading all that content and making a decision, Google could take all that unstructured data, not just Google, again, ChatGPT or Claude can take all that unstructured data, and give you a statistic based on everything they've read. And that's very helpful to users. And I think, again, users benefit.

(00:19:14):
And then a user might find out there's another piece of information where I'd actually like to read a medical paper, or that now I'd like to Google and find the closest doctor to me who has certain hours. That's a Google search. That's not an LLM AI search.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:26):
And just to clarify, I didn't intend to say that that was AI oriented. That happened a decade ago. So yeah, I totally, totally agree.

Eli Schwartz (00:19:36):
Well, I just thought that was interesting to really drill into the difference between structured and unstructured, because unstructured is actually where Google is disrupting everything. So this entire idea of SEO, again, up until 2022 was monetize unstructured data. Whoever wrote the longest piece of content on best beach hotels in Miami and then built the best links to it, they would win.

(00:19:59):
They win whether it's ads or win whether it's hotel bookings. Now, Google can start you off at the top of that and say, "These are the best beach hotels based on all the people that have written content," or actually Google's own unstructured data from the reviews and give you that. And then you can say, "Okay, I'd like to go to this hotel, or I'd like to stay in this city."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:19):
So help us understand even deeper this distinction between top of funnel and mid-funnel. So when people are maybe winning at one or the other, what does that look like? What are some examples of like, here's a top of funnel type of search that Google's going to eat and here's a mid-funnel experience that you can win that?

Eli Schwartz (00:20:35):
So in general, SEO has always been more at the top of the funnel generally, because you're curious about something. So let's say you're looking for a new software. You're looking for new podcasting software. So you search for top podcast tools, and you get back a list on let's say G2. G2 and all the sites like G2, like the Gartner sites like Capterra, all going to be massively disrupted. So you would get back a list from G2, which would give you out all the software.

(00:21:05):
And you would look at some and it would say, "This one's geared towards enterprise. This one's geared towards small podcasters. This one's free," and then now you've narrowed down your list to these three tools. And that's when you start doing those searches. Now you're mid-funnel. Now let's say you've chosen Riverside and you've gotten enough information from those other searches. Now you start searching Riverside price, Riverside capacity, Riverside bandwidth.

(00:21:29):
That's bottom of funnel, and that's where you'll now go buy Riverside. However, at the top, you were doing top podcast tools. So again, up until AI Overviews, up until this entire concept of LLM, whoever won on that long form piece of content would get that first click. But now that doesn't exist anymore. You just go to Google and Google tells you, "These are the tools. Oh, you're looking for a new CRM? This is what a CRM is. You want to know, do you need a CRM or do you just need a calendar?"

(00:21:59):
Look at that and Google will just tell you in a paragraph, and now you've redirected your search somewhere else into middle of the funnel. So I think that's where SEO always should have been because that's where conversions could potentially happen. However, SEO never was there before because the way most SEO measures its performance and its success is rankings. So they would say, "Well, it doesn't really matter if we convert on the word CRM. But look, we're number one, so we're winning."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:24):
First of all, as a user, this sounds great. I'm so tired of just all search results just being a bunch of SEO pages, just with a bunch of BS answers. And so I really prefer, Google, just tell me. Just tell me what I need to know. The other piece is if you really think about what Google has been trying to do, they've been trying to do this is like, here's our best shot at giving you an answer to this question, and here's links that'll point you to an answer.

(00:22:47):
And this is just a better version of it where it takes all the actual information and just gives you the end result. So it makes a ton of sense that they're doing this and the technology has finally allowed them to do this. Okay, so let's get to the, I don't know, $64,000 question, million dollar question, what should people do? What should people do to be successful in this new paradigm that as you're describing is in motion?

(00:23:09):
It's just starting to now happen. And it may be catching people off guard because they've thought it's already been out and things are okay, and you're saying it's actually starting to actually move quicker.

Eli Schwartz (00:23:20):
I think it's fascinating, I'm honored to be one of the few marketers on your product hard test, but I think of SEO as a product. And I think the product managers are the people that should be thinking about this SEO question because it's a product question. There are users that are coming in from the search channel. What is the product that I need to create for them?

(00:23:42):
What is the experience that I need to create for them? So typically, it was thought of as a marketing challenge of the product people have created this thing for me, and now I expect the marketers to go and do the SEO thing for it. But there's a mismatch. So for example, I find very often when I talk to SaaS companies, I don't think SaaS in general should do SEO.

(00:24:04):
But very often when I talk to SaaS companies, they have created a product for whatever user, and then the marketers are expected to make that product fit into the thing that the search results are around. And it doesn't work because that's not what they're looking for. No one asked the question of what it is that they're looking for. So now that SEO is changing and you really need to think about this mid-funnel and you need to think about a user experience and a buyer experience when they're doing the search, I think it all comes together.

(00:24:35):
And this is where the product people now need to think about how do we position this to the user that is not going to find out about this from a social channel, the user that's not going to be attracted by an ad, the user that's not going to discover this tool from a trade show. This is a user that's doing their own self-discovery journey, and this is what is the thing they're looking for and how do we position this product in a way that they're going to find it.

(00:25:00):
So that's what everyone should be doing, product really collaborating with marketing and discovering what is it that the user wants and showcasing that. I was recently talking to a company in the health space. They have an app. It's a health app. And we talked about their marketing. Their SEO in general was they write thousands and thousands of blog posts. AI has allowed them to do things they should never have done.

(00:25:25):
They wrote thousands of blog posts about health in general. I told them they shouldn't do that in general, but they wanted me to experience their product. So they gave me a code to download their app, and their app is awful. It's a bad product. So they're trying to do marketing that doesn't fit for a product that doesn't do the thing they say it's going to do. If they fix the product and understand the user, now it becomes, well, if I'm a user looking for this product, what are they looking for? How do we showcase that, again, in the mid-funnel?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:57):
Can you help us make this even more real? Maybe go through an example of a product you worked on or one that's doing this really well in terms of going from, hey, they want our product. What's the journey look like? What's a good example of that?

Eli Schwartz (00:26:10):
So the earliest example of where I discovered on this process was about 10 years ago, I met the CEO of Zapier, Wade Foster, and he was a co-worker of mine. I had invested in this company, and he asked me to meet with him to just discuss SEO. They were doing something that no one needed. They had this product which zapped things together, but no one needed it because they didn't know it existed. But people knew that they needed things to work together.

(00:26:38):
They just weren't looking for Zapier. So in my discussions with them, in our SEO experiments that we came up with, we said, well, people are looking for let's say Gmail and they're looking for Salesforce. They know that Gmail doesn't connect to Salesforce, they know Salesforce doesn't connect to Gmail, but they're looking for ways to pair it together.

(00:26:56):
So what if we created as a product a marketing way to showcase that this product of zapping Gmail to Salesforce and Salesforce to Gmail exists? And that's what we did. So we built that at scale for everything that could work, and that was the experiment that I did with them, where everything would be available and it creates this flywheel of, wow, if Gmail can work with Salesforce, what else does Gmail work with?

(00:27:21):
Can it work with this other tool I have? And that's a, again, early example where I stumbled upon this idea of people are looking for that other thing that you could do, showcase the fact that your product could do this thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:33):
I had no idea that you were involved in Zapier's SEO work. That's one of the most legendary successes of SEO. Very cool.

Eli Schwartz (00:27:40):
Total accidental. Whenever people ask me about programmatic SEO, and I know we have to dig into that, what programmatic SEO is, they're like, I want to imitate Zapier. It's always great to mention that I helped through that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:53):
That's amazing. Okay, so the lesson there is you realized that the key, the opportunity is to teach people what they could accomplish with this product. There's this awesome product doing amazing things. They have a need they're searching for, say it's like Gmail and Salesforce, and how do we help them see there's something really interesting here.

Eli Schwartz (00:28:12):
Yeah. I actually have a better one for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:14):
Great. Let's do it.

Eli Schwartz (00:28:17):
So I worked with Tinder for a couple years. One of the biggest challenges I ever had with SEO, especially as a consultant, is getting things done. And I worked with amazing companies and there's great people, but then they run into this wall. In my book, I talk about one of the earlier stories I had of this where I worked at a company where I was hired by the CMO and we built out a great plan.

(00:28:41):
And then we go to the CEO who brings in the CTO to discuss our plan, and the CTO says, "I don't have engineers for this. So you decide whether you want to work on the product or you want to work on this marketing thing you've done." And then we didn't do anything because they never resourced it. But I worked with this really great product person at Tinder, Udi Milo. He was the chief of growth.

Eli Schwartz (00:29:00):
At Tinder, Udi Milo, he was the chief of growth, and he really saw a problem where Tinder had never done SEO. All of Tinder's inbound came from the word Tinder, and he is like, "There has to be upside for SEO if they've never done it before." So that... he was convinced of that. He was willing to drive forward on this idea. So when we started working together, the first thing we came up with is what is someone going to be searching when they look for Tinder? And it's not online dating. That's a single word.

(00:29:31):
We're not going to write out long-form content around everything related to dating because that's not the Tinder product. You're not reading a piece of content about how to fall in love and then somehow converting into Tinder. But in our user research and in the discussions we had on what the investment we can make into SEO was we discovered that Tinder is a loneliness-solving problem, loneliness-solving solution. So you're lonely, you've gone to a new city, you don't know anybody you'd like to solve your loneliness problem. So because you're in a new city, it occurred to us that this is a local thing. So we're going to look for anything related to local. So what we built out is if you look for online dating in many cities around the world... This is beta. It remained in its beta state, but if you look for online dating in many cities around the world, you're going to find a Tinder page, which gives some examples of places you can go on a date. And more than that, it gives you Tinder as a solution to solve the loneliness problem you have.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:32):
So what changes here with the rise of AiO reviews and things like that? Is it this is where... this is how future of SEO looks versus just keywords and endless block posts.

Eli Schwartz (00:30:45):
Actually nothing changes here with AiO reviews because if you're looking for, you've gone to Dubai. You've just... You've gone to Dubai. It's a brand new country, you've never been there before, and you're lonely. So you look for online dating in Dubai, and you're going to get... Again, AiO reviews might tell you what the dating scene is like. It might tell you where to go on great dates.

(00:31:05):
However, it doesn't allow you to solve the loneliness problem you have. The loneliness problem you have is a mid or bottom-of-funnel problem. You're still going to click on Tinder's result, no matter what the AiO review does. So that's where I think SEO should be is you need to be in the buyer journey with the SEO you're creating. And it doesn't matter what AiO reviews does or doesn't do because you're still solving the mid-funnel problem with your SEO solution.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:30):
Let's go in a direction I was going to say for later, but it might be useful now, which is, say, somebody's just sitting there at their desk thinking, "Hey, I want to be... I want to start doing some SEO. I want to be successful at SEO. Haven't really done a ton here." With this new world of AI and LMs, what would be step one, step two, step three to move down a direction of starting to poke their toe in the water of SEO?

Eli Schwartz (00:31:54):
I think step one is the step that almost everyone misses on SEO, which is be the user. Try to understand who your user is. And there've been so many companies, and SurveyMonkey was a great example. One, I spent seven years at SurveyMonkey, and when everyone got onboarded at SurveyMonkey, they gave you a SurveyMonkey account and told you that you should run a survey. I think later, in the later years, they forced everyone in their onboarding time to use a survey... run a survey with people in the company, but before that, no one did. So they had this account, and they never did a survey. So they had zero customer empathy for why people use the tool.

(00:32:31):
And then, when you think about it from a product and marketing standpoint, you're thinking about it as a work challenge rather than a customer empathy challenge. So the first thing anybody should really do around anything that they're trying to do SEO is try to be that customer. So if I am a user of this SaaS, I'm building SaaS, and I want to market this tool, what is a user going to look for? What's the problem they're going to look for that would make them want to do a search? And earlier, I referenced that I don't think most SaaS tools should do SEO. And the reason is because a lot of times, when I talk to SaaS companies about SEO, I ask them this question, and they give me a blank stare.

(00:33:09):
So if you can't answer the question about what is it that someone's going to do a search on, then don't do SEO because SEO is about appealing to that user. If you can understand what the user should do around looking for whatever product you have, then that's the first step for SEO. So who is this user? Who am I marketing to? You're sort of creating this persona in your mind. Step two is think about the asset you're going to create. So pivoting over to what he talks about Tinder. So we understood that it was a user that was solving a loneliness problem any in the world because that's what Tinder does. It solves that loneliness problem in any way you want, of course.

(00:33:47):
And now we had to think about what is it that we're going to create. We know it should be global, of course. We would know we want it to be programmatic, which is something we should dig into like difference programmatic versus editorial. We know we want to be programmatic because no one wants to in position of writing a page out for every town or every city or every neighborhood in the entire world. So we want it to be programmatic. What things do we need to pull into that? And then the third step is really building, and we're on a product podcast. Of course, to the product people, you're building the product for that SEO user. So where do you get those inputs? What does this page need to look like?

(00:34:21):
So again, the reason I think SEO needs to be on product is because the inputs for SEO aren't the way many people think of SEO, which is a piece of content optimized for Google based on the keywords I've chosen. I think of it as a product, which means you need design resources. You need engineering resources. Of course, you need a product manager to really oversee the building of this. You need user research. So it's, again, more than just a piece of content. So going through those steps, again, it's understand who your user is, decide what it is that you need to create for that user. And the third is envision this product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:55):
So I think there's a really powerful point here that might be... people might not get, which is the user needs to be thinking of something they will go to Google to search for to find your product.

(00:35:07):
So it's if they're... if nobody is searching for the thing that you're building in some way, there's not going to be an opportunity for you to win an SEO or and benefit from SEO. Are there any examples that come to mind to you of B2B, SaaS companies that just like, "This is not... There's no SEO opportunity here, just like no one's searching for this thing."

Eli Schwartz (00:35:27):
Most of them. [inaudible 00:35:30]. One of my first consulting clients, right, when I left SurveyMonkey was Mixpanel. So, I mean, I just left my job, and I'm going to take any client that I have. I have some awful clients that I took, but Mixpanel was not an awful client. It was just an eye-opening client where we're trying to do SEO, and I'm doing SEO and exactly the way that CEO had told me SEO should work, and he was going to do it himself. So I told them the keywords. We came up with the content. We built the links. We did all the stuff SEO was supposed to do, and it didn't work. And we were sitting there, and I asked them to show me the user journey. They have a tool that does it. That's what Mixpanel does.

(00:36:06):
So someone clicks on a search result and they land on this piece of content, which we did research and we know what people look for, but why is it that it doesn't convert? And then I realized that there were other problems to this conversion, which is Mixpanel is a product you integrate in your entire company. You don't just do a quick Google for it and be like, "Oh, analytics. Yeah. I'm going to tell everyone we got to do it and it's going to be live tomorrow." Also, Mixpanel is expensive. So again, it's the kind of thing that there's friction of. You don't just click from a search result and then decide to just purchase it. You can't even purchase it on your credit card. I don't believe.

(00:36:39):
So those are the issues, and that's why I think SaaS is not the best fit for SEO because if you think about that journey, the problem doesn't necessarily exist. The SaaS solves the problem, but only once you know that problem exists. And getting people to know that problem exists is typically not an SEO challenge. It's typically a brand challenge. You make a viral video of you didn't realize that you could use this tool we've created to solve your problem, but no one is necessarily searching for a problem they didn't know they had or a solution they didn't know could exist. So that's where the breakoff is. And then the other issue, of course, is now they know the problem exists, but it's not an SEO journey.

(00:37:20):
So I had another eye-opening experience early in COVID when I was... everyone was home, and there wasn't a lot of things to do. Google reached out to me about a role on their team on Google Cloud for doing SEO. And there wasn't a chance I was going to take it, and it seemed like an interesting thing to go through a hiring loop and stay at home. So I had a fascinating experience interviewing because every time the... first it was the hiring manager and every time it was someone on that team that started the interview. They said, "Are there any questions that you have for me?" And then I spent the next 45 minutes asking them all the questions like, "Why are you doing SEO? What kind of keywords would you want to do? What does this SEO journey look like?" Because for Google Cloud, they only have two competitors, Amazon and Microsoft, and no one is going to do a search and be like, "Oh, Google's number one for this term I searched. Let me just go buy it." There's a decision-making process. You bring... There's a committee decision. So SEO sort of made no sense for that even to be included as a part of a marketing channel. And at a grand scale, Google Cloud should not be doing SEO. At a small scale, a lot of SaaS tools shouldn't be doing SEO because there isn't necessarily an SEO journey. I get a lot of pushback from companies when I tell them. They're like, "Look at all the SEO we've done." But that plateaus really quickly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:36):
This is really fascinating, and just to maybe reframe what you're saying because there's kind of a couple elements of this. It's not necessarily that people aren't searching Google for the problem. So I'm thinking of Vanta SOC 2 stuff. It's not like people aren't SOC 2 certification. It's not like they're searching... they're not searching.

(00:38:55):
And what I'm hearing is the bigger issue is they will never buy your product from that experience and that journey. It may educate them a little bit and may teach them, "Oh, Vanta exists," but they're never going to become customers. They need to talk to salesperson. They need to involve bunch of stakeholders. So it's basically a sales motion. It's not a product-led SEO motion.

Eli Schwartz (00:39:14):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:14):
Is that right?

Eli Schwartz (00:39:15):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:16):
Cool. Pulling on that thread a little bit further beyond maybe even B2B, just how does one decide if SEO is an opportunity for you, and also just how much should you invest in this opportunity just to explore it?

Eli Schwartz (00:39:28):
So we have to really put away the myth that SEO is free because it's absolutely not free. There's a cost in time. There's a cost and resources, and, of course, there's the direct expense for SEO. So if you're deciding that you should do SEO, so now we have to go through this evaluation. Again, this is where I think of it as a product where you have all these product ideas and what should you spend time and money on. So SEO is a channel you may or may not want to invest in.

(00:39:54):
So say there's a SaaS tool, and they're convinced there's an SEO journey, people do search for this solution. When I was at SurveyMonkey, we generated a couple of hundred million dollars a year off of organic traffic because it was a freemium tool where you search for the prodem... the problem, you find the solution, it's free, you sign up for it. If it works for you, you end up paying, and that's the revenue we've generated from organic. So say there is a journey, so people do search for it, and it makes sense to invest in SEO now is when you'll decide how much should you invest in it and how you should invest in it.

(00:40:30):
So typically, [inaudible 00:40:32] again, for SurveyMonkey, it was around creating content. It was around templates. It wasn't very expensive. But let's say there's a company that does not have a content team. They don't have a product yet that people are going to search for. They don't have a product manager that's going to be overseeing this SEO process. So say you need to hire this PM, or you want to hire an agency, a typical SEO agency, I mean, you're not going to spend $500 on an SEO agency. It's going to be upwards of $10,000 just because that's the cost of someone's time.

(00:41:01):
So it's $10,000 a month, $120,000 a year, gets even more expensive if you have a full-time employee. So that's one expense you're going to outline. Then, you're going to add in all the supporting resources. You need a CMS. That costs money. You need an engineer to support them. That costs money. You need a potentially design. You need content. So it can really add up quickly. And now you look at that investment, and you say, "For this tool, if I invested a million dollars a year in SEO, do I expect to make back a million dollars a year soon, right?

(00:41:33):
SEO will always make back money if it's the right fit, but soon. So SaaS tools, especially startups, they need to make that money back soon. Or if they took that exact same million dollars and put it into brand ads, or they put it into influencer campaigns, or they put it into just traditional paid marketing on Meta and Google, would you make that million dollars or $1,000,001 back faster?

(00:41:56):
And that's where I think the evaluation should happen instead of this default, "Well, I just got my funding. I need to invest in SEO because it's free, and everyone does SEO. And look, my competitors do SEO." It should really be this thoughtful strategic decision-making process of how much will this cost me all in and is this the right use of funds.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:16):
Amazing. So I think this is really important. It's not that you won't benefit from SEO. It's not that SEO isn't an opportunity. It's that you have much bigger opportunities in other areas. Most likely, if you're a B2B SaaS companies, because the journey isn't fully online, you're not going to convert by just reading a bunch of pages.

Eli Schwartz (00:42:34):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:34):
Super fascinating. Yeah.

Eli Schwartz (00:42:35):
Yeah. There was once a company I met, there was a SaaS tool, they were in a gardening space. [inaudible 00:42:39] they made a SaaS for gardeners, and they were insistent on doing SEO. And they asked me to look at a proposal they got from an agency for $15,000 a month, and it was all content. And then I asked them how their users found them. How did they get all the customers they had that paid them? How did they find them?

(00:42:55):
They said they go to these gardening shows around the country, and they have a booth, and each booth costs them $10,000. So I said, "Instead of spending $15,000 on SEO, you can get... you can go to all these shows for the exact same budget, and you get users who are interested, they're in market, they try your tool out at the booth, and then they leave and they're leads that you could follow up with. Instead of investing in me like, hope it works. It's sort of free. There are searches for it, but it's not the right searches."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:26):
The takeaway here is if you're thinking about whether SEO is worth an investment for you and you see all these other companies doing SEO winning with SEO, think about how much will this actually cost us. And I think the most important takeaway for me here is if you don't think it'll convert online if you think sales is the core motion of the process, it's probably not a good ROI for you.

Eli Schwartz (00:43:49):
Absolutely. Yeah. Really think about what are the trade-offs. Again, from a product standpoint, there's always trade-offs. So what are the trade-offs to investing in this channel versus another channel?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:59):
And I think what I've seen, there's all the... the way I think about it, there's four actual growth engines... there are four core growth engines. SEO, paid, virality, and sales. And what I find is, eventually, large companies do them all. Unless you're a consumer, you don't do sale. And so it's not like SEO should you never do. It's I think the main point here is earlier stage, when you have limited resources, probably not the best use of your time.

Eli Schwartz (00:44:22):
I think there are companies that should probably never do SEO. [inaudible 00:44:24] going back to what I said when Google Cloud, I don't think that Google could ever say... really pinpoint that there was a customer that they got purely from SEO, and you're going to do all sorts of weighted attribution. And maybe that person did discover Google Cloud from a piece of content or piece of SEO asset, but they never would've converted with all those other things that they've touched.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:45):
And it's not like you're saying, "Don't be on the internet and don't will make it easy for people to understand who you are, don't have a great site, don't have other pages writing about you. It's just don't... You don't need to spend time optimizing the search results for Google Cloud. You're not going to benefit significantly from that work.

Eli Schwartz (00:45:02):
Yes, I mean, again, go really digging into this user journey piece. I don't think restaurants typically should have a website. Not only should they not do SEO, but I don't know that they should have a website.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:12):
Hot take.

Eli Schwartz (00:45:12):
Because if you think about the buyer journey for a person looking for food, they don't typically go to a website. So if you're looking for pizza, and again, a lot of pizza shops have websites. But if you're looking for pizza, you're going to Google Maps, DoorDash, Uber Eats. You're not going on Google and saying, "Pizza near me," and then browsing the websites and just making a decision about where to eat lunch.

(00:45:35):
Again, if you're choosing how to cater your kid's birthday party, that might be a different thing, but you're not browsing and saying, "These are the places I'm going to go right now." But more than that, it's expensive, and there's no way that that pizza shop knows that the website they have with the soft music playing and their menu that comes up in flash, which is expensive, does a single thing for them. Most of their orders are going to come again through those other platforms.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:59):
Yeah, I hate restaurant websites. One thing I read once that explains why what restaurant websites are so bad is restaurant owners are big on just like what is the experience when someone enters my restaurant that they go through the vibe, and they do that on the website. They're like, here's the music, and here's the imagery, and here's the animations.

(00:46:18):
And nobody wants that in [inaudible 00:46:19] on their website. Just like give me the hours and location and your menu. You mentioned a couple of things that I want to drill into a little bit. So, one is just how long SEO should take for you to see results. Two is just expectations of what does good conversion look like. What does it tells you this is actually us, a journey that could work for us well enough that SEO might work? So maybe those two questions.

Eli Schwartz (00:46:40):
So those will be custom for anything. And I hate to use the word, it depends because I think whenever consultants say it depends, they're just... they're throwing their hands up and saying, "I don't really know. I'm not... I don't have an opinion on this." And it's like when you go to a doctor, and the doctor's like, "Well, it depends." I mean, you could be dying, or you could just... need to take a nap, right. So there's a custom answer here, and it comes down to what the company is and what the expectations are. So how long it takes, that depends on what you're building. So if you're... if there's an... Again, with Tinder, it took us a while to actually build anything.

(00:47:15):
So it took us all this time to build for ideate them, build and then to see results. But once we built, and I love working with big companies that are well-known brands, because what we build, as soon as it's available on the web, it's like this turning a huge ship. It starts driving revenue and starts being super effective because it's there. Something didn't exist, and now it exists, and it drives revenue. Smaller companies, it may take many months before Google notices. It may take many months before the demand is there. With Zapier, I think it took them a couple of years before they even saw any results because nobody's looking for it. So it comes down to what it is that you're building and how quickly users will come and find and need that solution.

(00:47:57):
Then, as far as what the expectations are on conversions, that also is really depends on what it is that you're looking for. There's... Some companies are building media, and they [inaudible 00:48:09]... I mean, again, I think most companies should just not write a lot of content unless they're a media company. But if you are building media and you're monetizing that content from a media standpoint, so maybe it leads, maybe clicks off the page into leads, or maybe it's CPM advertising, so then your conversion is... what you're trying to do with SEO is get a lot of page views because the more page views you get, the more clicks off that page you get into something else. If you're a SaaS tool, then your conversion should absolutely be whatever a MQL should be.

(00:48:37):
So you... And again, I think most people don't do this correctly with SEO. They used the wrong conversion metric, which is top-of-funnel ranking. "Oh, I'm ranking. My SEO is successful. I'm number one for this." Instead of, "How does this benefit me?" There was a company I was working with, a SaaS tool. They're in a two-sided marketplace they worked with... in an HR space, so they only monetized one side of that HR space, but all the traffic was on the other side of the HR space. So when we were talking about their SEO conversion problems, I suggested that they delete all the content that was on the wrong side of that marketplace because they didn't convert at all.

(00:49:14):
And there's no... And this is a common misconception. People will think you get a benefit from traffic. Google sees, "Oh, I get all this traffic from search. They think I'm a very good website. So even though none of this converts for me, I should have a blog because blogs are good." It doesn't really work like that. I mean, maybe if you're this massive website and I don't know, let's say, get millions and millions of visits, then you can build some sort of authority and some good experience in Google, and now you can launch something else, and you don't have to worry about needing to build up that authority. But generally, driving traffic to something that doesn't convert for you wouldn't be a good idea.

(00:49:48):
So really understanding what is it that you're trying to do with SEO traffic, that's your conversion metric. So it could be MQLs, could be page use, could be dollar conversions, it could be people picking up the phone or watching the video, but it has to be some sort of conversion. So for a startup, it might mean that they... you're getting links. I mean, at a minimum, people reading your content deciding to link to you and give you social shares. That might be something you put in a pitch deck. Whatever it is, there has to be a conversion metric that matters for the business.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:20):
So just to give someone that's starting to do this something concrete to look at. When you come to a startup and help them with SEO, what do you usually track as a sign this is working that we should keep investing? What's... What are the couple metrics that you look at most?

Eli Schwartz (00:50:37):
The first is really understanding what is it that they care about. And rankings could be something they care about if someone else cares about it. So, for example, if they're going to put in their pitch deck, "We're number one for this tool," and investors, they don't know that that doesn't convert. So that might be something that we should care about. They should be number one for that tool. If it's MQLs, so they just need people filling out lead forms.

(00:51:02):
So really understanding who it is that they're trying to attract with SEO that's the metric we're going to use. And again, I don't know why SEO... this happens with SEO but not any other channel. No one doing paid marketing will ever say, "This is how many times I'm number one on this search, or this is how many clicks I get, or look at how much I spent." There's really a, "We spend this, and we're this efficient. This is what we drive from that." And SEO really needs that same rigor.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:29):
So what I'm hearing is look at if you're in B2B leads coming in through SEO, track that, or rank potentially if that's like a vanity thing, you can show investors and you're saying traffic alone, because usually in decks I see and investor updates almost always the metric I see is traffic we're getting through SEO.

Eli Schwartz (00:51:46):
Yeah, total waste of time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:49):
Amazing.

Eli Schwartz (00:51:50):
Yeah, I mean, unless there's a reason for it. So if you're a media company and traffic means that that number keeps going up, then yes, it matters. But if you are driving leads and that traffic number goes up, you're not driving more leads from SEO. You're getting worthless traffic. It doesn't help the business.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:07):
Awesome. Okay. Back to the question of just how long it takes just to give someone something here that they can tell... that can tell them when it makes sense to keep going or move on. Say you're just taking a shot at SEO, how long should you give it to make a decision this is working for us or not? Or is it always, "There's always something here, keep working." How do you decide keep doing or not?

Eli Schwartz (00:52:28):
When you're building out an SEO effort, and I'm going to keep going back to this, it's a product. So you're building out a product and you're creating milestones. So you say we're... it's going to take us this first month to ideate on what it is that we're building. It's going to... In the second month, we're going to build out a PRD for engineers to start working on. In the third month, they're going to start working, and they're going to ship this.

(00:52:49):
Now, if you start missing all those milestones, so I mean, this is a common problem in consulting in general, you miss all those milestones, and then some will say, "What's... We've been working together for six months, and we have nothing to show for it." And you can point very specifically to all those milestones that were missed. So that's the result of not shipping or not meeting the milestones that the SEO didn't work.

(00:53:11):
So as you're meeting those milestones, you can say, "Well, we launched, and our expectation was that after the first month of launching, we would have X amount of pages indexed. Did we meet, or did we miss that milestone?" And then you can say, "SEO is working at a small scale." And I've seen in many companies it takes a really long time, but eventually, when you look back, you see this hockey stick, but while you're in it, you don't necessarily see that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:38):
Awesome. Okay.

Eli Schwartz (00:53:39):
Okay. Let me share an example of one that worked really quickly. So this was also an interesting one, and I was at SurveyMonkey, and I was introduced to the CEO of Quora, who was interested in doing more SEO. So Quora had never done SEO or never done SEO effectively from a product standpoint. And there were a couple of things I was able to recommend to them, and within three months they had quadruple traffic. So it really will depend on what is it that's holding things back. In Quora's case, they weren't showing any answers. So they were really pushing to get people to log in before they saw any answers.

(00:54:15):
So I encourage them to show the answers. Yes, they were going to be giving way answers for free, but they were also going to be giving answers to Google. So that was number one. That they were able to quadruple traffic. And the second thing is they had no way that Google could navigate within the site. So when you came to Quora, and it's like this again, so they reversed the suggestion I made, but I think it was 12 years ago. So when you came to Quora, and when you come to Quora today, you see related questions. So you see a question and then there's related questions. And that's the way a bot or a human will navigate through the site.

(00:54:48):
If they create a sitemap, they did this in the past, and if Quora's listening, you should do this again. If you create a categorized sitemap where you can say, "These are all the questions on health and from the sitemap, again, it's HTML sitemap, not just an XML sitemap and way even a user can navigate through it. This is health, and this is health page one and health page two, and you can navigate through this entire site. Then a search engine can navigate through the entire site, and all of the questions and answers are discoverable." So when I made that suggestion to them, within a couple of months, they were able to quadruple traffic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:20):
There's so much here, and there's so many valuable insights. One that I think is really recurring that I think is really important to people is the point that you're making about your SEO content pages should solve... should be a product, AKA should solve problems for people as they're trying to understand the space and the potential problem they have.

(00:55:39):
So correct me if I'm wrong, but kind of the advice you're sharing is there's less opportunity in just generating tons of blog posts that just have a bunch of content. And the opportunity is more things like Zapier and Canva with templates and Notion and Quora where it's just like, "Here's the answer." It's just like actually help them solve the problem. And with that, "Here's how our product [inaudible 00:56:03] help you solve that problem further." Is that...

Eli Schwartz (00:56:05):
It's really building a product around what the company is attempting to monetize. So Canva is building templates because then they're going on to monetize that templates by having other people build off those templates with upgrades and subscriptions. But if a company was... Let's say there was an enterprise version of Canva, and they didn't monetize those templates, so putting out a bunch of free content on the internet that just looked good wouldn't benefit. So it always comes down to what is it. What is the product that you want to use? So going to mention the templates did at SurveyMonkey, so the survey product.

(00:56:39):
If someone looked for a template of a survey, they wanted to make a survey. So we were not a survey product, and we just monetized off the survey templates that would not have done anything for us. So copying someone else's version of programmatic doesn't do anything. And generally, doing programmatic for the sake of programmatic, so just to have content, wouldn't do anything unless that programmatic fed you into exactly what your product did. So Zapier, they did programmatic. It feeds you into making other zaps between different products. Tinder, we did programmatic.

(00:57:11):
It fed you into, "Oh, well, you would like to solve your lonely... We showed you that your loneliness problem is solvable in the city you're in. You have to solve that problem by downloading the Tinder app." And I've never used Tinder, only used it from a marketing standpoint, but [inaudible 00:57:26] Tinder gates you. So if you'd like to get the advanced Tinder experience, you have to pay. And again, they're... it's all part of that buyer journey, and anything you're building SEO for, it has to be a piece of that buyer journey. So programmatic, blog posts, anything you're doing, if there is no product journey for it, there's no user journey, it just stops.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:45):
That's an amazing clarification. So again, it's another point you've been making of traffic alone is not valuable if it doesn't convert. And so you can look at a Canva, you can look at Notion at Airtable with all these templates, copy that. But if that isn't the thing people, will buy from you and monetize it's not going to be worth doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:00):
... Will buy from you and monetize. It's not going to be worth doing.

Eli Schwartz (00:58:04):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:04):
Awesome. I'm excited to chat with Christina Gilbert, the founder of OneSchema, one of our longtime podcast sponsors. Hi, Christina.

Christina Gilbert (00:58:13):
Yes. Thank you for having me on, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:15):
What is the latest with OneSchema? I know you now work with some of my favorite companies, like Ramp, Vanta Scale, and Watershed. I heard that you just launched a new product to help product teams import CSVs from especially tricky systems, like ERPs.

Christina Gilbert (00:58:30):
Yes, so we just launched OneSchema File Feeds, which allows you to build an integration with any system in 15 minutes as long as you can export a CSV to an SFTP folder. We see our customers all the time getting stuck with hacks and workarounds, and the product teams that we work with don't have to turn down prospects because their systems are too hard to integrate with. We allow our customers to offer thousands of integrations without involving their engineering team at all.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:52):
I can tell you that if my team had to build integrations like this, how nice would it be to be able to take this off my roadmap, and instead use something like OneSchema, and not just to build it, but also to maintain it forever?

Christina Gilbert (00:59:04):
Absolutely, Lenny. We've heard so many horror stories of multi-day outages from even just a handful of ad records. We are laser-focused on integration reliability to help teams end all of those distractions that come up with integrations. We have a built-in validation layer that stops any bad data from entering your system, and OneSchema will notify your team immediately of any data that looks incorrect.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:23):
I know that importing incorrect data can cause all kinds of pain for your customers and quickly lose their trust. Christina, thank you for joining us and if you want to learn more, head on over to OneSchema.co, that's OneSchema.co. Okay, so coming back to AI and its impact on SEO, can you use AI to help you with this, and use AI to create content for you?

Eli Schwartz (00:59:49):
AI is a tool. Everyone says AI is a tool, it's not a solution. You can use AI to create content if the content you're creating is a part of that journey. For example, before AI content really came on the scene, because AI's been around for a while, Jasper's been around for a while, Writer's been around for a while before ChatGPT. Before these tools, a lot of ways that companies created content for cheap is they went on Fiverr, and they went on Upwork, and they just created content.

(01:00:20):
A lot of that content, completely worthless. If you're just creating content for the sake of content, and you paid someone on Upwork $50 for their content, now you can use an AI tool and just create the content, the same worthless content, for free. AI as a tool is a tool creating something that's not necessarily useful for the end journey of the company and for the user journey in general. However, if the content you were creating was pretty useful, and now you're using AI to create really useful content for cheaper and better, of course, you can use it.

(01:00:53):
An example of a place you can use AI content is if you're an e-commerce site and you're selling your own products, of course, you can use AI content to write product descriptions. It's not a content website. There's a lot of big companies out there, and if anybody wants to look at some of the e-commerce sites and how they do SEO, a lot of them have large SEO teams. The typical JCPenney, the Nordstroms, the Macy's, they have a lot of content on their category pages, but if you look at the keywords that drive traffic to those pages, it's the products on the pages.

(01:01:25):
If you're looking for shoes, the fact that a Macys.com page will have a lot of content about what shoes do doesn't do anything for the user. They're just looking for shoes, and then there's shoes on the page. I think Macy's actually ranks pretty well on those kinds of things. Using AI content to write more fluff content that's not necessary would just be a waste of time.

(01:01:46):
Using AI content to feed in a product, and describe what that product is, and maybe some features of that product which help a user, that's not hurting your SEO, because what you're trying to optimize for is the product and the product name itself.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:59):
Got it. Basically, don't use AI to generate entire blog posts. I know people are doing this all over the place, but absolutely leverage AI to help you add to existing pages, descriptions, titles, things like that, which I can see why Google, Google would've no idea that you were helped to write this thing with AI, right, if it's just a small part of the page versus the entire page?

Eli Schwartz (01:02:25):
In their documentation, they say that AI itself is not the problem. It's the helpfulness, the usefulness of the content that would be a problem.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:35):
You don't have to name names or reveal anything, but do you know of a bunch of companies using AI now to generate tons of high successful pages, high converting pages in some way? In this way?

Eli Schwartz (01:02:44):
There's this hatred of AI content by users in general. I think once companies declare that they're using AI, people get upset about it. It was a Red Ventures company, I think it was CNET that said they were using AI to create content. I think they got in trouble because they said they're using AI to create content, but if they had not said they're using AI to create content, I think their entire model would've been very successful.

(01:03:09):
There's no reason you can't take in, they take 10 products, and they want to review 10 different products. There's no reason you can't tie that all together, have AI write the original piece of content, and then have a human editor just review it. I don't know, years ago, it's not AI, but it's sort of like AI, but there are sports websites that will take in a lot of the things that happen in the sports game to merge it all together into a piece of content.

(01:03:34):
If you look at any earnings reports on public companies, it's sort of the same thing. Their company will issue, they'll file their earnings report, and then now it's AI. Before AI, it was basically like Mad Libs kind of content. It would extract pieces of the earnings report and then it would write a blog post, which is actually fairly useful. I don't think there's an issue with it itself. I don't think users have an issue with it.

(01:03:56):
I think if you read that old piece of content, again, on earnings reports, it's pretty obvious that it wasn't written by a financial journalist, but it was useful. You got a quick summary, you didn't have to go into the SEC and read an earnings report.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:09):
There's this guy, Noah Smith, he's on Twitter, he's got a newsletter called No Opinions. It's awesome. He had this tweet about how we're approaching an age of a ton of slop of content, just a lot of really bad content generated by AI for better or worse, this is related to SEO, but it makes me think about just how much bad stuff we're going to see.

(01:04:28):
To your point, it doesn't matter whether it was generated by AI or not, people will gravitate towards and Google will gravitate towards stuff that is useful and good, whether it's written by people or not.

Eli Schwartz (01:04:41):
This is a huge issue for Google, because the amount of content being created is enormous, and it's growing exponentially. Google's trying to crawl everything. They now have more content to crawl, which becomes more expensive for Google, and which is why you have this backlash by Google against many websites, because they're trying to clean the index to save their own costs and to protect the users from having to see this awful content.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:06):
The crazy thing for LLMs is now to be trained. They're trained on content on the internet in a big way, and they're struggling with not training their LLMs on stuff that AI has written because it becomes this, a bad direction that LLMs will go. They're trained on themselves. Anyway, something I wanted to come back to around AI, which is AI Overviews. I imagine many people are like, "How do I get into that answer? How do I get my product into the answer that Google gives at the top?" Is that something you recommend people try to do? Is that something you can do?

Eli Schwartz (01:05:42):
I think of AI or AI Overviews as a branding exercise. Getting into the AI Overview, and Google has links, I mentioned this earlier that Google has links within the content, and I think a lot of what Google does is around potentially liability protection. They're having links. They're saying, "Well, we didn't tell you to jump off the Golden Gate Bridge, this website, which we summarized, told you to jump off the Golden Gate Bridge," or, "We didn't plagiarize. We just linked to the piece of content. We may have extracted more from the content than we were supposed to, and the law hasn't decided that yet, but we linked to it, so it's fair."

(01:06:17):
Right now, Google has these links in the content, and it sort of links off of it. I did a survey on LinkedIn, and I was surprised by the answer. I thought most people did not click on the links. I got a couple hundred responses, and it's sort of 50/50 and based on my SurveyMonkey experience. It's not a statistically significant survey in general, but it will never go to 99% and one. That's fairly indicative that people are clicking the links, which surprises me, because I don't think that the links are necessarily meant by Google to be useful, which means that AI Overviews is essentially duplicating search results.

(01:06:53):
You have this AI Overview which summarizes, then you have a link so you can link off of it, and then beneath it, you sort of have the exact same thing. That's the challenge that Google has to work through. For a company to show up in AI Overview, it's a brand challenge. If your link shows up there, then you likely were showing up beneath it in the ranking results, so you've already done the work you're supposed to do.

(01:07:12):
If you're showing up in the AI Overview mentioned as a brand, like, these are the top CRM tools, you're showing up as a brand, that means you've exercised brand efforts and it's working out. I don't know that companies necessarily want their content to show up because they're giving away their content for free. They want to be showing up in a way that benefits them. If you show up as a brand, you've done good branding, but if you show up as a link, it means Google has stolen your content, and people may or may not click off of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:41):
Along this lines of brand and SEO, do you have any... That's always this question of are we investing in brand? Do we just want people to be aware we exist, or are we trying to actually drive conversion? Any advice on how to think about brand building and SEO, especially with this world of AI?

Eli Schwartz (01:07:57):
The biggest myth in SEO is that you could just build links, and link building is the secret source and the secret sauce to growing your SEO footprint. That's totally wrong, because the way most people build links is they buy these guest posts, or they pay for links on low authority websites that sort of look like they might have authority, and it doesn't really benefit anyone because no one's reading these sites.

(01:08:22):
It's funny that everyone complained about Google as this really, really smart, all-knowing LLM, and at the same time, they think they're dumb enough to fall for these guest posts that are on websites that no one really read. The right way to build links is to build a brand. It comes part and parcel of what you're trying to do. If you're building links, and going back to all the SaaS examples we talked about, so if you've created a bunch of content that is not relevant for the product you're trying to sell, building links to the content that doesn't really benefit the product, doesn't really benefit, the links don't benefit the product.

(01:08:55):
If you can build this product that's awesome and everyone loves and wants to use, and you get not links, but mentions, and links might be mentions now, because the way a link before LLMs and the link 10 years ago was actually an HTML link. Now, Google can read content. They can say, "Well, you've been mentioned here," that's pretty good. Now, we acknowledge that this might be the brand, and this might be the match for that kind of thing.

(01:09:23):
That's helping to build that brand. In general, I think of any SEO effort as promoting a brand, building up a brand, rather than building a product, and then separately building out an SEO effort, which has content that may not be relevant, and links from websites that are certainly not relevant to content that's not relevant. It all comes together as being one big effort. The same thing you'll do on PR, you'll do for SEO.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:50):
Awesome. Okay. I'm glad we touched that. There's a few other directions I want to go, so I'm going to bounce around a little bit and cover some of the other stuff I wanted to extract from your deep experience in this space. One is you've mentioned this idea of programmatic SEO a couple times versus editorial. Maybe first, just clarify what those two directions are, just for people that don't exactly know what you mean. Then two, what's your general advice for which direction to go, programmatic or editorial?

Eli Schwartz (01:10:19):
It might be obvious at this point, but I'm going to say it's dependent on the user, but essentially, what programmatic is is it's taking a bunch of data sources and building out a page that is a combination of all these data sources. In my book, I talk about two of my favorite programmatic SEO companies. One of them was created by a past, well, it's not created, the strategy was created by a past guest of yours, Luc Levesque, who introduced us, and that was TripAdvisor.

(01:10:50):
TripAdvisor took in all these data sources of, "This is the hotel, these are the cities," and then it allowed UGC to combine into one comprehensive page about each property. TripAdvisor did not write a piece of content on every single hotel. They don't write a piece of content on, "Here's this long form blog post as an influencer on the Waldoff Astoria of New York, and here's a long form blog post about the Marriott Marquis in San Francisco."

(01:11:17):
They built it all from a programmatic standpoint. They took all these data sets, they took all the countries in the world, they took all the properties, and they merged into one comprehensive page, which has dominated the top of search results since the beginning of the time. They still own it. That team has cycled through many, many leaders, many different, a lot of different things, and they're still number ones. It's the strategy that has allowed them to build that brand and to dominate it.

(01:11:43):
The second example is Zillow. What Zillow did is they solved an early problem many years ago in the real estate space, which is no one understood what the value of a piece of property was. Zillow took in all of those data sets. They got, some of them are government data sets, some of them are their own comparison data sets based on other home sales. The government can say a house is worth one price, and based on their comparison, Zillow can completely disagree with it.

(01:12:11):
They're building in these data sets, and they're taking photos from realtors, they're taking neighborhood data, they're taking school data, and that's a programmatic SEO page. SEO is the only channel to bring in traffic to each one of these pages. They're not going to do paid traffic for my house, they're not going to do paid traffic for your house. The only way someone would find that page on Zillow, either they start at Zillow.com and then just navigate through it, or they Google it. Those are programmatic SEO efforts.

(01:12:38):
On the flip side is editorial. Editorial would be, in TripAdvisor's case, writing out that long form piece of content around each hotel, each city, and all the things they've done. Zillow would be the same. Zillow would take 500 million properties and write out an editorial piece of content. Neither of those would be a fit for their model, and it would be extremely expensive. Say each piece of content would cost a thousand dollars, that would be cost prohibitive for anyone to do.

(01:13:06):
Going back to my distinction based on the user, what is it that the user's looking for? Is the user looking for the value of a home? They don't need a long form piece of content. They need a piece of content or a page that just says what the value of that home is. TripAdvisor's case, they're looking for a single thing, a rating, or maybe they need some of that UGC, but really, they're looking for that rating. That long form piece of content, there's a purpose for it, but not on TripAdvisor's site.

(01:13:31):
Understanding, what is it that the user needs will help solve, do you approach this from an editorial standpoint, or do you approach this from a programmatic standpoint? Some of the companies I mentioned earlier, like G2 and Capterra, which are completely being disrupted, so they're being disrupted by editorial, but they're also being disrupted by Google itself with their AI Overviews.

(01:13:53):
If you look for the top CRM tools, you have G2 or you have Capterra, but you also have Forbes writing out a long form piece of content on what Salesforce is, what HubSpot is, and that's probably unnecessary.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:07):
I think generally, you would, programmatic is the better path and the most common success path is what I'm hearing. What are things you need in place to be successful in programmatic SEO? Like basically, you just need some sort of data source that you own. Is that just... What's a checklist of like, "Here's what tells you you have a big opportunity here?"

Eli Schwartz (01:14:29):
Programmatic is the right solution when there's scale and when there's a user use case. If there is not, you create scale for nothing. An earlier version of programmatic, again, pre a lot of the internet companies now, is building out a piece of content for every single zip code in America. Say you offer some sort of local product. You would build out a page for every single zip code that is, in theory, programmatic, but users don't look for it, and Google has completely disrupted that with their own local products.

(01:15:02):
Programmatic can always be something. I see programmatic mistakes all the time, where websites look at, they say, "Look, we're making reviews of software. There's 10,000 different softwares in the world. We're just going to make out a page for each one and we're going to combine it with, I don't know, a city." You can make programmatic pages like that, but there's no use case. Really knowing what programmatic solution to use comes down to, "Is this something that someone would actually be looking for? Does this page itself provide a solution?" Zapier provided a solution because someone was looking for that combination, but there are many tools like Zapier, which try to be Zapier, but they're not looking for that solution. Going back to some of the template companies you mentioned, I don't think a lot of companies that make templates, they're making programmatic, but there's not a use case for every single one of those templates. They've made programmatic for no [inaudible 01:15:53].

(01:15:54):
Again, SurveyMonkey was one where we had a fat head of templates we could make, but it wasn't a long tail. We could make a hundred templates, but we couldn't make 10,000.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:05):
I want to do a rapid fire of SEO myths. Before I do that, I know that you spent a lot of time actually reading the recent ruling against Google and their whole deal with Apple, and you were telling me it revealed there were a lot of interesting stuff about their strategy and where search was going. Let's spend a little time here, just what did you learn doing that exercise?

Eli Schwartz (01:16:28):
It's fascinating. It's 286 pages. I basically read a book. It was a verdict.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:33):
Oh, geez.

Eli Schwartz (01:16:34):
I would say that the judge or the clerk that wrote this verdict has a better understanding how the SEO works and how digital marketing works than most people I meet in digital marketing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:43):
Wow, I did not expect to hear that.

Eli Schwartz (01:16:44):
Yeah. This verdict explains how Google decides to rank a page. The verdict explains how the auction model works in ads, in Google Ads. I think that's fascinating. Talked about the comparison between social media. This court really understood a lot of the questions that were posed to them. For example, Google tried to say that they're not a monopoly because they're social media. The court analyzed that question and said, "Social media is not a comparison to Google search."

(01:17:12):
Google tried to say a lot of the things they did were non-monopolistic because there's alternatives like Bing. The court really analyzed a lot of these things. Why I found it fascinating was, again, a lot of the testimony was public, is the summary of how the court put it all together in a verdict. A few of the things I learned is one, the market share, Google's market share. That's been a number that no one really liked to talk about.

(01:17:39):
Google would say, "Oh, we think it's like 80%," because they didn't want to be viewed as a monopoly. Microsoft would say, "Well, maybe we have 20%." I just found a recent document from Microsoft where they claimed to have a lot of market share in search. In the verdict, it says that Google has 98% of mobile searches. I forget whether it said that the court said it, and it said Google didn't disagree, or that came from Google's own documentation, but 98% of mobile searches.

(01:18:08):
The thing that I thought was most fascinating from the verdict is how much the default partnerships that Google has contributes to Google's success. The plaintiff in the case was the Department of Justice suing Google for being a monopoly. However, I don't know what the word is, but one of the complainants in this is this company, Neva, which was a search engine started by a past Google, I think it was like a head of research or something. A senior person at Google created a new search engine.

(01:18:39):
A lot of the trial was focused on how Neva could not be successful, despite having a better search engine, despite having a better experience for users, because they didn't have any of these default distribution agreements. That's the part that I thought was most fascinating. Google has these default agreements with Apple, and they also have Chrome.

(01:18:58):
They have all these inputs into Google searches, which means that I don't think there's a chance, and this is the biggest takeaway, I don't think there's a chance that ChatGPT, or Perplexity, or Claude, or any of these other LLM startups, because they're startups now, even OpenAI is a startup with Microsoft's investments, still a startup. I don't think they have a chance at really unseating Google purely from a quality standpoint.

(01:19:27):
That's what a lot of the documentation in this verdict is about is how much a force of habit, how much the brand, and how much the distribution agreements Google has, drives searchers to Google. There were a couple of very interesting insights. One is that Bing tried to give itself to Apple for free, and Apple said there was absolutely no price that they would take to use Bing search within Apple.

(01:19:49):
Another one was Mozilla had a partnership with, I think it was Yahoo, and they did a rev share deal with Yahoo, and everyone switched back to Google. When people say, "Well, SEO is dead, everyone's going to go to OpenAI," and you just look at the 25 years of Google's existence and what they've built, I really don't think so. I really think distribution and the force of brand will keep almost everything Google has today.

(01:20:14):
Now, why is Google fighting back so hard to build AI Overviews? Well, I think there's two answers. One is, like I said, Wall Street. They really want Wall Street to think that they care and they're doing this thing. The other is losing small percentage points to ChatGPT costs Google a lot of money, so it's worth it for them to invest in it, but I don't think that they have any fear about not being the most dominant search engine in the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:37):
Well, isn't the idea with this trial that this may change, and they may lose that default status, whether it happens or not, that's the whole game here, right? It's like maybe they can't be that anymore, and that maybe opens up. I think that's the opportunity potentially.

Eli Schwartz (01:20:52):
I don't think so. Yeah, I'm no legal expert. I don't know what the DOJ will do, but what's interesting, if you saw Google's press release when the verdict came out, so Google tweeted, "We thank the court for recognizing that we're the greatest search engine in the world, and more to come." They're going to fight back, and it's almost like a bully being declared the world's greatest bully. They're like, "See, told you we're strong."

(01:21:15):
When reading the verdict, it actually said, "There is no competitor. Google is the greatest search engine. They have 25 years of great data. They've done a fantastic job." I don't see any way that those, if they break the default agreements, Apple actually loses all that money Google's paying, and then users will still Google. That's not what will do it. I think the only thing they can do is figure out how to prop up a competitor.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:40):
Yeah. I think that's an interesting takeaway. People will go to Google, will switch to Google even if it's not default. There's actually a really interesting takeaway from Ben Thompson's analysis of this stuff, and I will point to the podcast episode. I think that shifted my perspective on this, because when you hear Google is paying Apple to be the default search engine, it sounds nefarious and unfair. The deal is actually revenue share. They give them a percentage of the revenue from the ads, which ends up being $20 billion, something like that, a lot of money for Apple. Anyone else can come to Apple and say, "We will give you a revenue share of our searches also." It's just nobody is as big and can pay as much. If you think about it, why can't Google come to Apple? "Hey, we will send you tons of money by doing the search for you and giving you a large percentage of the ads that we are doing for you."

(01:22:36):
It's weird to not allow that if you really think about it, but it's also unfair, because no one else will ever be able to compete with that.

Eli Schwartz (01:22:43):
Yeah, and that's what the court said is like Neva didn't have a chance because of that. One other point is, so I did this survey, this was years ago when I was at SurveyMonkey, I did a search market penetration survey to figure out who used what, like Bing versus Google. On my survey, I was generous. I threw DuckDuckGo on there, and I came back, I had thousands of responses, and came back that I had 1% of people use DuckDuckGo.

(01:23:07):
I didn't realize it, that DuckDuckGo didn't actually know what their market penetration was. When I shared the survey, Gabriel Weinberg, who's the CEO of DuckDuckGo, hit me on Twitter and he said, "Can you share the data with us? We really would like to see it." This was, let's say 10, 12 years ago. In the verdict, it said that DuckDuckGo's market share is 2%. I came back with 1% 12 years ago. DuckDuckGo, I think they raised a hundred million dollars.

(01:23:33):
They have all these brand partnerships. They have, at baseball games, they have their logo, they've done everything, and all they've been able to do is get from 1% to 2%. There's a lot there, and Google being Google, I don't see anyone knocking them off.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:49):
Fascinating. Well, thanks for sharing your takeaway so that we don't have to read this report. Before I move to rapid fire SEO myths, is there anything else along the lines of AI or SEO that you think is really important to share that you want to leave listeners with?

Eli Schwartz (01:24:04):
I think the most important thing to leave people with is SEO is not dying. There will always be a world where users are requesting their own information. One of the reasons I think these home assistants, whether it's from Google, or Apple, or Amazon, have never taken off, is because you don't have choice. You talk to your Google, and it gives you only one answer. You talk to Amazon, and it gives you only one answer. Like, "I want to buy toilet paper," and Amazon just buys you whatever it decides to buy you.

(01:24:33):
There will always be a world where there needs choice. One other piece from the verdict is Google believes that we're in the very early days of LLMs, and even with all the machine learning they do and understanding users, you will always need real user data, which Google has on past searches. I think users will always be requesting their own information, and there's never going to be an AI that understands you so perfectly, it's going to know that for you personally, you would like to click result number five.

(01:25:01):
That's the best fit for what you're looking for right now, which means that there always needs to be multiple choices to make. Yes, most clicks are probably going through the first one, two, or three results, but there needs to be seven, 10, multiple pages of Google, because some people do go to those other pages. I think that's the most important thing to underscore is that all of this means that search changes, a lot of top-of-funnel search goes away, but in general, there's always going to be a world where people are doing the searches.

(01:25:33):
Then the last piece on that really is when you're looking to do something with search, you're looking to take an action. Companies benefit from those actions. Say you're a hotel, and you want people to sleep in your hotel and pay you to sleep in your hotel. The aggregate number of people needing to take that action and pay you for it does not change even if search volume gets cut. If you're selling shoes, people still need to buy shoes.

(01:25:58):
If you're selling information, though, your media, if you're WebMD, yes, your revenue declines, because that information that you now aggregated and curated and gave away for free in return for people clicking on ads, Google is now going to give away for free in return for no one clicking on ads.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:16):
Interesting. I wonder if there's an investment arbitrage opportunity of predicting which businesses will decline with this and which will thrive. Anyway, I want to talk about SEO myths. I know that you have a few things, and we've talked about a few of these, I think, of just things that you know people believe about SEO, but they're actually wrong. Let me just ask you, what are some myths that people get wrong about SEO?

Eli Schwartz (01:26:44):
Probably the biggest one we've said over and over is they even need to do SEO. There's this always default assumption that you've raised money, you have a marketing team, you should do SEO. I think that one is really worth putting to bed is think about that user journey. Should you do SEO? It's a question like, "They ask about other channels, should you do brand..."

Eli Schwartz (01:27:00):
It's a question like they ask about other channels. "Should you do brand marketing? Should you take out an ad in Times Square?" And no one will say, "Well, I just raised a million dollars. I should totally take out an ad in Times Square." And congratulations on being in Times Square, by the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:15):
Thank you.

Eli Schwartz (01:27:16):
No one will just decide, "Oh, I've got money to burn, let me just burn it." So somehow SEO becomes this thing of like, "Oh, I've raised money. Now, I need an SEO team." So that's I think the first myth that's really important to just put to bed.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:30):
Awesome. What else?

Eli Schwartz (01:27:32):
Link building. So link building is brand building. So it's thinking about how you're going to build a brand and have people mentioned to you. And when you're doing link building, you're creating a relationship between the piece of content that has linked to you and the product or whatever you're trying to monetize. So that should be link-building. Just getting the idea of getting links on... An HTML link will equal SEO success, again, I think that's completely wrong. And then I mean probably the biggest myth in general is thinking that Google itself is a black box. So I think there's nuances to how you rank, and no one can really unearth what is it that will you be number one and what it is that will make you be number three. But the basic idea of how you build SEO is very simplistic and Google has a best practices guide on what it is that you should be doing, which is build a website that Google can understand, link to the pages in that, write content that is helpful and that users want to read. And those are the basics. And starting with that is how you're going to build an SEO strategy that improves upon it. But the idea of if, "I take all three of these steps right now. I'm guaranteed to be number one," I think is something that is completely incorrect. And there's an assumption that if you do a lot of things around SEO, you're going to be successful. And I think that that's incorrect.

(01:28:57):
Yes, there are nuances. But for the most part, you get from most... Zero to 10, you can get to step eight by just doing the best practices.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:09):
Oh, wow. It sounds very empowering. I like the sound of that. Maybe just on that thread briefly. If someone wanted to start down the road of SEO, I know you're going to be a little bit biased because you help companies with this, but do you recommend bringing someone like you in first or having someone just give it a shot, listening to this podcast, reading some books and blogs, or something else?

Eli Schwartz (01:29:32):
Yes, so I am biased. I think they should have the right people give them advice on SEO. So if someone wants to be... If they validated that there is an SEO effort, paying for help on SEO, it goes back to that resource discussion we had before. So if you want to hire a growth advisor, a growth advisor might be very expensive, but you squash a learning curve so you don't make as many mistakes as fast.

(01:29:56):
If you hire someone in-house, and a lot of times they see this with roles where I'm helping companies hire someone for SEO, they don't have a lot of budget, which means they're going to have someone that doesn't have a lot of experience. So is that the right decision to make? If you're hiring an agency, agencies are typically expensive, and agencies a lot of times get paid on deliverables. So are the deliverables they're doing worth paying for?

(01:30:20):
An easy deliverable that a lot of agencies produce now is content, but that goes back to our earlier discussion. Do you even need the content? It's very easy for agencies to sell content as deliverable because it's something they actually deliver. Delivering strategy the way most of my growth advising works is very difficult because I don't have a strategy to offer in a proposal because I haven't developed a strategy, and we don't actually see the fruits of that until we implement the strategy. But agencies can end-run that by just saying, "Oh, you pay us on a monthly basis and these are the things we're going to shift to you."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:53):
Something that I wanted to touch on, which might be a myth and might not be a myth. But I think you're going to say it's a myth based on what you said about Google being so dominant. There's a lot of talk about TikTok and Instagram replacing Search for people. I actually do search TikTok a lot now for like, "How do I solve this problem? How do I cut a watermelon? How do I, I don't know, find a cup for my baby?" It's really good. What's your take on TikTok and Instagram videos basically replacing a lot of searching for Gen Z, especially, and younger kids?

Eli Schwartz (01:31:26):
In the Google Verdict, I think Google's said this before. 63% of Gen Z uses TikTok to search.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:31):
Oh, wow.

Eli Schwartz (01:31:32):
Yeah. I think that's just a headline number because it comes down to, you said it over and over in the podcast, user journeys. So there's going to be things that are more appropriate for TikTok or Instagram, and there are going to be things that are more appropriate for Search. So I think if you're doing top-of-funnel discovery, you're going to maybe watch TikTok videos to learn more about the topic. But as you go into the mid-funnel, so say you want to... A popular TikTok search is around travel. So you want to go on a trip. You want to go to Southeast Asia. You don't know where exactly you want to go. So you might want to watch a bunch of videos and see influencers and see experiences. But now you're ready to book. And you want to book a hotel. You want to book your flights. All of that is not going to happen on TikTok. All of that's going to happen on Google Search. So that's the mid-funnel again.

(01:32:24):
A lot of search will move different places, but ultimately, Google is still the right place to do those searches, to do those mid-funnel searches. So maybe it was more inappropriate that there ever wasn't TikTok for you to get those better experiences. For those top-of-funnel things, you had to suffer through reading awful content that was written only for SEO purposes, and now you get rich dynamic content that comes from TikTok.

(01:32:49):
And one interesting piece on this is if TikTok does get banned in the US, which looks like it's likely, a company that will pick up all of that users is YouTube. So YouTube has YouTube Shorts. And again, we're looking at a potential monopoly with Google as Google tries to put those YouTube Shorts to solve the problem that TikTok was now solving. So that will be kind of interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:14):
Oh, man. Google all the way down.

Eli Schwartz (01:33:18):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:18):
A thought I had as you were talking about this idea of mid-funnel versus top funnel is a simple way to think about the mid-funnel is where there's intent. You actually have intent to now buy a thing, a specific thing. Yeah. Cool.

Eli Schwartz (01:33:30):
I mean that's what it is, but it's a buyer journey. So at the top of the funnel, you're curious. You don't know if you have intent. And in the older way of doing SEO where you only focused on top of the funnel, you only focused on rankings as a KPI, which I think is sort of the incorrect way of doing things. There is no intent. So you showed a KPI that matched with a non-user, which matched with a non-buyer.

(01:33:55):
As you move down the funnel, there is intent. So there is a user and there's less traffic. There's always going to be less traffic at the middle of the funnel. But that doesn't matter because your KPI is closely related to your business metrics.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:08):
Let's do a couple more myths if there's anything else that we missed, and then we'll wrap up and get to our very exciting lightning round. Is there anything else that you think is an important myth that people get wrong about SEO?

Eli Schwartz (01:34:19):
I'll touch on one more myth, which is that technical SEO is an easy solve to any SEO problems. So there's been a lot of Google updates recently. Again, I think... I don't like to defend Google because in reading the Verdict, I think that Google did some pretty evil things. But a lot of what Google has been doing is pushing back on the things that users hate. There's a lot of bad SEO content out there. So Google's trying to get rid of a lot of this bad SEO content in their recent updates.

(01:34:46):
When sites get hit by these updates, they try to solve the problem that they think happened to them by doing technical SEO. So they'll reach out to me or to someone like me and say, "Can you do an SEO audit and understand why our traffic has suffered?" The reason their traffic has suffered is because they've done things that were not really useful for users and they sort of polluted Google. They need to solve that problem. Technical SEO has a place. So if you have a large website with tens of millions of pages, if you're Zillow, how you link to each listing, if you're Airbnb, how you link and allow Google to crawl a site and understand a site, very, very important.

(01:35:23):
If you have a hundred-page website that sells a SaaS tool, technical SEO is probably going to be less important. So spending money and time on technical SEO would be a waste of time. So I think that's another big myth is you solve SEO problems with the right SEO solution rather than, "Let's do an audit or let's get better links or my page..." Page speed is another one that... Agencies like to sell on... If things related to page speed, Google keeps changing the words of what that is, but it doesn't matter as much.

(01:35:54):
Because at the margins, yes, maybe if you're Kayak and you're competing, you get Expedia, and Kayak is maybe slightly faster, maybe that matters. But if you're in a space where you're competing against lots of slow terrible websites, it doesn't matter at all. So spending a lot of money on making that fix is not the right thing to do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:15):
I like how you just make SEO feel much more approachable and simple and something that you could just do and not have to again figure out the dark arts that...

Eli Schwartz (01:36:26):
It is not a dark art. It should be for most things, it is simple. And then there are tons of companies out there get in a lot of trouble, and there's billions of dollars to be made on doing the right SEO. But a lot can be unlocked by very simplistic SEO. PMs that don't really have an SEO background can do enough SEO to make a lot of money for the company without needing to be an SEO expert.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:48):
I love that. That's actually how it worked at Airbnb. The PMs work in SEO were not like historically SEO legends. They were just PMs figuring out SEO and they had a really big impact. So that really resonates with me. Eli, is there anything else that we haven't touched on that you think is important to you or something that you think might be useful to people to leave them with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Eli Schwartz (01:37:11):
Yes. So I think we talked about how to decide whether to resource SEO, but we didn't talk about how to understand what the expectations are from SEO. So this is something I came up with while I was working at Faire, which is a very interesting company. So it's F-A-I-R-E. They are a wholesale Shopify. They were launching in a new country, and they wanted to understand what the upside of launching in that country was from an SEO standpoint. So the way most people do SEO forecasting is they do a bottoms-up forecast, which is they look at keywords. So say we want to sell a pair of shoes.

(01:37:48):
You do a bottoms-up forecast, you go onto a keyword research tool, and they're all fairly the same. Look at how many people search for shoes every month. And then you try to estimate what your ranking would be on that word shoes, and then you estimate what you click through it would be, and then based on that, that's your clicks. And then you get a conversion rate, and that's your bottoms up.

(01:38:08):
And you make an assumption that the word shoes in that tool didn't capture all the people that search like white shoes and black shoes and running shoes, so you just gross it up. You just pick a number and you gross it by 10, and that's your SEO forecast.

(01:38:23):
Now, the problem with that is that usually it's too small. So you get this number and now you're pitching to launch in a new country. I want to launch in Japan and sell shoes. And you say, "Well, I think I can get 500 users because based on the way I got here, this is my click-through rate and this is my rankings and I'm 500 users." And no one will ever fund that. That's too small.

(01:38:44):
Now if you're launching in a new country, it's actually fairly easy to figure out what your SEO upside is because you can take the population in the country. So this is not something Pharoah sells, so I don't have to... So I'm not giving away anything. But say you're launching shoes. You're launching a new product website that you're selling shoes in a country like Japan.

(01:39:02):
I'm going to guess. I don't know the actual numbers for Japan. So say Japan has a hundred million people and you're selling shoes. And you're not going to sell shoes to a hundred million people. We're only selling shoes to men. And let's just divide it in half. 50% of Japan is men, so we got 50 million people that would buy shoes.

(01:39:19):
But now, we're also going to say, "Well, there's older people and younger people and we're not selling shoes to them." So now we can take 25 million and cut that in half. And then from there, again, we're selling shoes on the internet. Not everyone buys shoes on the internet. Some people buy shoes in a store. Some people buy shoes on the internet. So you take some percentage rate of the amount of people that are going to buy shoes on the internet and say, "We'll take 10% of our 25 billion people in our market. 2.5 million people buy shoes on the internet and we want to do SEO for 2.5 million people. And our expectation is we want to get this number of market penetration, whether it's 10% or 50% or 100%." And there's your number and multiply that number by the amount of shoes they're going to buy every year and your AOV and there's your forecast.

(01:40:07):
And that may be inexact. And you can tweak those numbers up or down. You can say, "Well, my AOV was wrong. My market penetration was wrong. I was wrong on the total population. I didn't realize that in Japan, no one bought shoes on the internet." But at any point in time, you can go back and adjust your forecast. Whereas if you're doing this bottoms-up forecast, it's actually in many cases wrong to begin with because the keyword research volume is wrong.

(01:40:29):
I worked with some really fascinating companies where the largest query in their space was the biggest query. So I worked with WordPress. So WordPress, the word WordPress is the biggest query in the web development space itself. There's no other word that's as big as WordPress. And the number that every single keyword research tool had was completely wrong of what Google Search Console said for the word WordPress is, "When you're building these forecasts based on keyword research tools, that first number that you build the entire forecast off of if it's wrong, your forecast is wrong." So when you do this top-down, it's a TAM forecast essentially. When you do a top-down, you're closer to the truth. Now, you probably aren't going to get to the truth. I've never seen a product plan get to the truth of what it could do, but it will help you make a better decision than if you just guess.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:20):
Wow, this is a massive insight you're sharing. So you're saying the keyword research tools are not actually that accurate in terms of the opportunity there. And why is that? That begs the question. Why are they so off? What are they doing wrong? What are they missing?

Eli Schwartz (01:41:34):
They have their own secret sauce for estimations. So even Google, again, for past monopolistic reasons, Google's not allowed to give the real number that they see on Google Ads for how many people search it. They have to buy it from another data source, and then give that out. I forget why. They're all basically guessing. So they're using whatever sort of proprietary algorithms to guess, which is why a lot of them are not aligned because they have their own algorithms. So you're using, whether it's Semrush or Ahrefs, one of my favorite tools is Similarweb, which Similarweb has a lot of browser plugins, which snoop on the way people are searching. So whatever it is that they're... Because Similarweb has browser plugin, but they're not seeing every single person's search, so they have to use algorithms to estimate how much the entire world would be.

(01:42:18):
And again, I don't know that any of them could get close to truth was when I... I worked with big companies where there were keywords that I could look at Google Search Console, some of them, the tools were overestimating by 10 times. Sometimes they're underestimating by 10 times. So I'm not saying they didn't get the exact monthly number wrong. I'm saying they got it wrong by many factors.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:38):
Wow, that's crazy. So your advice is... Do you just ignore those numbers? Or is it just, "Check it out but don't roll it. Don't use that number"?

Eli Schwartz (01:42:48):
They're indicative. So I would say if you want to know like, "Do most people spell WordPress with a space or WordPress without a space?" It's pretty indicative that people spell it without a space. But if I were building a forecast and say, "Oh, I absolutely choose this based on this defined number." I don't think so. I can use it for normalization. And I use them only for normalization to understand how do people search. And I really like user journeys and they're helpful for understanding user journeys. But as an exact science, it's hard to really use that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:19):
That's wild. And so it's mostly useful for order magnitude and comparing one keyword to another relative in this bit. Okay, interesting.

Eli Schwartz (01:43:29):
Yes. I mean I have a great example of how wrong it could be in estimating traffic. So there was a company I was working with early in COVID. The public company, their board member emailed them and said, "You guys are getting crushed by your competitors in COVID because look at your competitors. I'm looking at one of these tools and you're at the bottom and you're doing everything wrong." And the CMO says, "What do I tell this board member?" I said, "The board member is completely wrong. This is the Google Search Console." And Google Search Console is not perfect, but again, it's real data and our Google Search Console shows that our traffic has quadrupled in COVID, so it doesn't really matter what this external tool shows. So they're helpful. Tools are helpful. But I don't think they are a source of actual truth.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:15):
Wow. That's an awesome point in closing. One thing I had noted here that I want to make sure you have a chance to talk about is just you're really passionate about helping people get into SEO and also just becoming advisors the way you are. Share what you think might be useful to people along these lines.

Eli Schwartz (01:44:33):
As my own forecast and prediction, I think the need for SEO expertise is going to explode because a lot of what is happening in the search layouts is going to mean that companies have to pivot their approaches. So again, companies focus on rankings, they focus on traffic, and a lot of that goes away. Suddenly the layout changes, the traffic changes. It's not necessarily going to impact their bottom lines if their SEO wasn't a right fit. So this is going to create a lot of interest in SEO help, and I'm seeing this.

(01:45:02):
Over the last year, my own inbound has really grown because there's a lot of questions as things shake out. So there will be people that want to go into SEO consulting, and I think there's going to be a huge need for it in growth advising in general.

(01:45:15):
What I would say is, and I had amazing mentors along the way, some of your past guests like Casey Winters and Yuriy Timen, Ethan Smith, they're all guests with great episodes, but they advised me and they shared with me not on how to be a better operator, but on how to do sales better, how to propose better.

(01:45:36):
And for anyone out there that wants to become a growth advisor, I'd say that that's the skill you really want to perfect. Communication, sales, proposals, and not really worry about being the best operator. You should be the best operator, but that's probably the skills you already have. And don't make an assumption that because you're a good operator today, you'll also be a great growth advisor. Build that growth advising muscle by staying on your day job. Don't quit your day job, and moonlighting and practice selling, closing, working, retaining, and that's where if you're successful there, you can be successful on your own.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:11):
Amazing. And I know you have some posts that get into this stuff that we'll link to you, right?

Eli Schwartz (01:46:15):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:15):
Awesome. It's kind of think of yourself as a product and the journey of working with you.

Eli Schwartz (01:46:21):
Yes. You're building a brand. You're not building a consultancy.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:24):
I love that. Eli, this has been amazing. And with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Eli Schwartz (01:46:31):
Absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:33):
Here we go. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Eli Schwartz (01:46:39):
As has been apparent, I really like user journeys and understanding people. So there's a book called Small Data by I think Martin Lindstrom. I don't know if I'm pronouncing his name right, where he talks about understanding people and understanding how people buy. And he digs into that entire process. He actually goes and lives in people's houses and watch how they use different tools and toys. I always find that book to be fascinating, and recommend to people who want to understand users.

(01:47:04):
Simon Sinek's Start With Why. Again, the same idea. Really understand what a product a business is supposed to be doing to understand users. This is specifically for growth advisors and not necessarily for PMs, but Million Dollar Consulting. It's a book I read, recommended actually by Ethan Smith many years ago. A fascinating book on how to build a brand and become a growth advisor. I ended up working with the author as a coach for almost a year. Amazing book.

(01:47:33):
And then the last book that'd be remise in not recommending is my wife's book, which is How To Stop Caring What Others Think: For Real. So it is a book for precisely that. Understanding your own successes, not worry about what other people think about you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:47:48):
Beautiful. Is that in the background, by the way? And if not, you got to put it in your background, your wife's book.

Eli Schwartz (01:47:53):
My wife made the background. So yes, it is in the background.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:47:56):
Which one is it? Which color am I... Just so people recognize it. Oh, the big one right there. I was wondering why that one was a little taller than the rest.

Eli Schwartz (01:48:02):
Yes, this is the book.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:04):
There it is. Wait, move it up a little bit so we can see the full cover. Oh, beautiful. Stop Caring What Others Think. Beautiful. I need that. For Real, I like the ends, but for real.

Eli Schwartz (01:48:13):
For Real.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:15):
I love it. Okay.

Eli Schwartz (01:48:15):
It may or may not be a Google Search query.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:19):
Oh, man. I see. I see what happened there. Genius. Okay, next question. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Eli Schwartz (01:48:27):
I was on a plane and I saw this movie Blackberry and it looked like a documentary, so I don't know if you've seen it, but it was fascinating. Because it's one of those movies, it has a cliffhanger, and you know exactly how it ends. And it is such a fascinating movie. I didn't know all that history, but they owned the entire smartphone industry, and they went to zero. And it really charted that journey and it makes you think like, "You can never really rest on your laurels. You have to create a product people want and understand your users and keep selling that product." And not be like, "Well, we're number one, this will never go away." And great movie.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:49:03):
Funny, it was just recommended by another guest very recently, so there's trending up. It's been around for maybe a year at this point. I watched it.

Eli Schwartz (01:49:09):
Yeah, I never would've watched it if it wasn't on a plane. It was totally... It seemed like a plane movie, but it was perfect.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:49:14):
I watched that at home. And I love just the technical... Their ability to find clever ways to use the cell networks, that felt impossible, and that's what allowed them to all these. I like the messaging and things like that. That was really fascinating because I didn't realize they basically reverse-engineered the way the cell networks worked to allow what they allowed. Yeah, awesome movie, and crazy story.

(01:49:38):
Next question, do you have a favorite recent product that you've recently discovered that you really love? It could be an app. It could be some physical.

Eli Schwartz (01:49:46):
It's not a recent product and it's the kind of thing I fall in love with over and over again. And it might be cliche, but it's my phone. So I recently traveled in Southeast Asia. I lived there for a little bit. So I haven't been back in eight years. And the things I was able to do with my phone like traveling, Google Maps, Waze, and ordering food. I went from multiple countries and I was able to use the same app to book rides and make payments. It was so useful.

(01:50:12):
Eight years ago, and I was there and I had to buy a SIM card and my phone didn't really work and I couldn't make payments. It changed my entire experience. I almost didn't need a computer. So falling in love with my phone again.

(01:50:24):
And then another one that... It's not necessarily recent, but I absolutely love, which is Grammarly. So I like writing. I write all my own stuff. I don't write with AI. Grammarly helps me to be a better writer.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:50:37):
You know what I've realized about Grammarly recently? I just upgraded to their pro plan. They're like the best product at upselling you on their paid plan because they're just right there in your face all the time. "Hey, we have stuff. We have so many tips for you. We have so much we can improve. Just pay a hundred whatever bucks and we have so much advice to make all your writing so much better." It's right there in your face all the time. They're so good at it. And they got me. They got me. And I'm happy. It's not like that much money in the scheme of things if you're doing this full-time.

Eli Schwartz (01:51:08):
I'm so embarrassed when I use Grammarly on my book and it just shows up all blue and green. I'm like, "Oh, man, if only I had known."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:51:17):
I actually have a copywriter on my newsletter who's incredible. She finds a hundred things every time to improve that even when I think it's perfect. And interestingly, she doesn't do what Grammarly suggests in more cases than I would expect. So that's kind of interesting I'm finding. But anyway, yeah, Grammarly is great. I use it all the time.

(01:51:36):
Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often use yourself, share with friends or family, find useful in work or in life?

Eli Schwartz (01:51:44):
I don't know that it fits into a sentence, but it's something I always encourage people, which is to really think big and think long. So I just started working with LinkedIn as a consulting client, and I've talked to LinkedIn about working with them for six years. So, never give up. You meet someone and propose something and suggest an idea you never know where it'll go. I had that all through my career with living in different places, really not think about the moment of where things will go, but just it's a relationship you're building. You don't ever know where anything will happen. So look at the big picture.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:52:22):
Love that. And kind of following along those lines, last question. Curious if something comes up here. What SEO win are you most proud of?

Eli Schwartz (01:52:30):
I don't know if I could say most proud of. But I really like what I do with Tinder because it brought the entire journey together. There's users out there that didn't know that Tinder would solve a very specific problem, and it's just there to solve that problem. And it's not the way Tinder thought of themselves. They thought of themselves as a dating app, but it's a loneliness solution problem that answers a Google Search.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:52:57):
This has been awesome. I think this is going to help a lot of people think through SEO and especially as they realize how things are changing, they're going to have this resource now to be like, "I see. This is what I should change. This is what I should be doing." And I just love, especially the pattern and the thread of, "It's not actually that complicated. You can do it even if you've never really done it before." So I really appreciate you being here and sharing all this wisdom with us. Two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to reach out to work with you? Also, check out your book. And finally, how can listeners be useful to you?

Eli Schwartz (01:53:29):
You can find me on LinkedIn. So search Eli Schwartz, and you should definitely look for my book. So the book is Product-Led SEO. Actually, one piece on just your own personal brand and your own personal rankings. It doesn't matter where you rank if you search your own name. So if LinkedIn shows up first for your name, that's great because they're finding you. And a lot of times, brands and people will be very focused on where they're positioned, but it's about the journey. If they find you, they find you. It doesn't matter if it's number one.

(01:53:59):
And that also underscores that it's not all about links. I believe for my own name and probably for you too, I outranked LinkedIn. And my book, so if you search Product-Led SEO, my own personal website, which does not have the best domain authority, it outranks Amazon. So that should right away disprove that it's all about links. That's all about SEO metrics. It's really all about the right fit. So be the right fit, and you'll show up where you're supposed to.

(01:54:25):
And then users can be most helpful for me by subscribing to my newsletter and giving me ideas and feedback on what to write. I really enjoy writing, and I really enjoy hearing from people. So my newsletter is Productledseo.com.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:54:36):
It's so consistent across all your things. I love it. Productledseo. Eli, thank you so much for being here.

Eli Schwartz (01:54:42):
Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:54:44):
Bye, everyone.

(01:54:46):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
There's this term everyone's hearing about, AEO.

Ethan Smith (00:00:02):
Answer Engine Optimization is how do I show up in LLMs as an answer?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:06):
It feels like such a big deal to win at AEO.

Ethan Smith (00:00:09):
In order to win something like what's the best website builder? At Google, they would win if their blue link showed up first.

(00:00:15):
But that's not the case in the LLM, because the LLM is summarizing many citations, and so you need to get mentioned as many times as possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:21):
ChatGPT is driving more traffic to my newsletter than Twitter.

Ethan Smith (00:00:25):
You can get mentioned by a citation tomorrow and start showing up immediately. You can have a Reddit thread, you can have a YouTube video.

(00:00:31):
You can be mentioned on a blog. So early-stage companies can win, they can win quickly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:36):
Are the leads that these answer engines are driving to companies actually valuable?

Ethan Smith (00:00:41):
Significantly more valuable. Webflow saw a 6X conversion rate difference between LLM traffic and Google Search traffic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:48):
A lot of people are seeing this as everything is different. Nothing we've done before is going to work. We have to rethink everything.

Ethan Smith (00:00:53):
There's significant misinformation on AEO. There's news articles about how Google Search is going to die because there's a new thing.

(00:01:00):
Google's slice of the pie stays the same. The pie gets bigger.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:05):
Today my guest is Ethan Smith. Ethan is the CEO of Graphite and my go-to expert for all things SEO. SEO is going through a major transition right now. Everyone used to go to Google anytime they had a question, or were looking for a product or doing research. These days, a lot of people are moving to ChatGPT and Claude, and Gemini and Perplexity to get answers to their questions, and this will only be accelerating over time.

(00:01:29):
And even Google is changing the search experience in a pretty radical way with AI Overviews at the top, and their newly introduced AI Mode, which is basically their own version of ChatGPT. This means that the world of SEO is going through a big change, including the rise of AEO, which stands for Answer Engine Optimization. Basically, SEO for ChatGPT, getting your product to show up in the answers that people get.

(00:01:51):
Ethan has been at the forefront of this new skill and channel. And in this conversation, he shares everything that he's learned about how to get your product to show up more often inside of the answers that people get. The advice that Ethan shares in this conversation is incredibly tactical and worth a lot of money. So please slurp it up and use it for your own products.

(00:02:10):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube, it helps tremendously. And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 15 incredible products, including Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD and Mobbin.

(00:02:29):
Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com and click product pass. With that, I bring you Ethan Smith. This episode is brought to you by Orkes, the company behind Open Source Conductor. The orchestration platform powering modern enterprise apps and agentic workflows. Legacy automation tools can't keep pace.

(00:02:47):
Siloed, low-code platforms, outdated process management and disconnected API tooling falls short in today's event-driven, AI-powered agentic landscape, Orkes changes this. With Orkes Conductor, you gain an agentic orchestration layer that seamlessly connects humans, AI agents, APIs, microservices, and data pipelines in real time at enterprise scale.

(00:03:07):
Visual and code-first development, built-in compliance, observability and rock-solid reliability ensure workflows evolve dynamically with your needs. It's not just about automating tasks, it's orchestrating autonomous agents in complex workflows to deliver smarter outcomes faster. Whether modernizing legacy systems or scaling next-gen, AI-driven apps, Orkes accelerates your journey from idea to production.

(00:03:31):
Learn more and start building at Orkes.io/Lenny. That's O-R-K-E-S.I-O/Lenny. My podcast guest and I love talking about craft and taste, and agency and product market fit. You know what we don't love talking about? SOC 2. That's where Vanta comes in. Vanta helps companies of all sizes get compliant fast and stay that way, with industry-leading AI, automation and continuous monitoring.

(00:03:56):
Whether you're a startup tackling your first SOC 2 or ISO 27001, or an enterprise managing vendor risk, Vanta's trust management platform makes it quicker, easier, and more scalable. Vanta also helps you complete security questionnaires up to five times faster so that you can win bigger deals sooner. The result?

(00:04:14):
According to a recent IDC study, Vanta customers slashed over $500,000 a year and are three times more productive. Establishing trust isn't optional, Vanta makes it automatic. Get $1,000 off at Vanta.com/Lenny. Ethan, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast. Welcome back to the podcast.

Ethan Smith (00:04:41):
Excited to be back.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:42):
We did a podcast episode just over two and a half years ago. I think of it as the definitive guide on how to win at SEO. People have been referencing it ever since. I'm really proud of what we did there, but things have changed.

(00:04:54):
Things are changing in the world of SEO. And so I'm excited to talk to you again about how to be successful in this new-emerging world where AI is changing how SEO works, the rise of AEO and GEO.

(00:05:08):
Let me start with just this question. How long have you been working on SEO at this point? And has anything come close to being this significant in changing the skill of SEO?

Ethan Smith (00:05:19):
Yes. So I got started in SEO in 2007, so it's been 18 years. Actually, the largest change when I got started in SEO, I got started in programmatic SEO and commerce SEO, like NexTag and Shopping.com and PriceGrabber. And that was when you could do mass, auto-generated landing pages.

(00:05:41):
And that was probably the biggest shift, which is Google introduced a bunch of algorithms, Panda and similar things, to prevent you from doing spam. So essentially, you went from the SEO being spam to not spam. That was probably the biggest change, and then this is probably the second-biggest change.

(00:05:56):
I think that the main thing here is it is related to search, but it's a summarization of search and there's new inputs. So it's probably the second-biggest change.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:03):
Okay, that is really interesting, because I think a lot of people are seeing this as everything is different. Nothing we've done before is going to work.

(00:06:10):
We have to rethink everything. You're saying this is actually the second-biggest change, and just like Google's update back in the day was actually even more significant?

Ethan Smith (00:06:17):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:18):
Very cool. Okay, let's set a little context for folks. Let's define some terms. There's this term everyone's hearing about.

(00:06:25):
There's actually two, AEO and GEO. What do they stand for? Are they different? What are they referring to specifically?

Ethan Smith (00:06:33):
They, I think, are the same. Ultimately, the definition of a word is whatever a group of people agree is the definition of a word. So I think we'll see what people decide is the definition of the word. I'll put forward my definition. So AEO and GEO are essentially trying to describe the same thing, which is how do I show up in LLMs as an answer?

(00:06:52):
And I personally prefer Answer Engine Optimization versus Generative Engine Optimization, because generative, you can generate images and videos and things other than an answer. Whereas answer is more narrowly defined, so my personal preference is we're talking about optimizing LLMs.

(00:07:09):
So an answer is more narrow of a definition than generative, but ultimately, it's whatever we decide is the name and the definition is what it will be.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:19):
Okay. Yeah, yeah. Answer Engine Optimization sounds a lot cleaner to me if you had to pick one. So it's good to know they're the same thing. Some people just prefer the latter one for some reason.

(00:07:28):
It's interesting because recently, I don't know if I told you this, but I was looking at my referral traffic. And I found that ChatGPT is driving more traffic to my newsletter than Twitter, which I did not see coming.

(00:07:40):
So somehow it's already happening. I'm excited to learn just how to lean into that potentially and optimize it further.

Ethan Smith (00:07:47):
And when did you see the spike? Did you see when it started growing dramatically?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:50):
Unfortunately, the dashboard I have doesn't give me great peripheral traffic optimization. When do you think I probably saw it?

Ethan Smith (00:07:57):
Companies that we work with started in January and it started, one, because of more adoption, but two is because the answers became a bit more clickable.

(00:08:05):
You have maps, you have shopping carousels, you have clickable cards. So I think the clickability of the answer is increased, and then the adoption increased and that was around January.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:14):
Okay. I want to come back to this question of, "Is this good that ChatGPT is sucking all my content and giving people answers, and then sending me some percentage of that?" But let's not get into that yet. I want to talk about just what kind of impact you can have on having your stuff show up in ChatGPT.

(00:08:32):
So I had the head of ChatGPT, Nick Turley, on the podcast recently. I asked him, "What do you think of all this stuff, AEO, GEO?" He's like, "Don't worry about any of that. Just write awesome stuff, great quality content. It'll figure it out. It'll find the best stuff." I imagine you very much disagree.

(00:08:47):
I imagine you have seen real impact getting your stuff proactively into these answer engines. Talk about just the kind of impact you've seen and just your reaction to that?

Ethan Smith (00:08:56):
Yeah. I agree and disagree, but the way that I think about it is anything can be optimized. You just need to understand the underlying systems and the rules of the game, and if you do that, then you can optimize anything. You can optimize algorithms, you can optimize people, anything could be optimized.

(00:09:11):
What I think he probably meant by that, he probably meant two things. One is, "Please don't spam my product." And two is, "If you do, I will see it and I will stop you from doing that." So it's not a long-term, robust strategy to create spam, just like it wasn't a long-term, robust strategy to create spam on Google.

(00:09:29):
Eventually, Google was going to say, "Huge shopping comparison sites are making 100 million auto-generated search pages and I don't like it, and I'm going to get rid of the whole category." So same thing with ChatGPT, anything can be optimized, but if you're spamming it, they'll see that.

(00:09:43):
And they'll have a whole team looking at that and then they'll change your algorithm to prevent you from doing that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:48):
What kind of impact have you seen? You've done work with a lot of companies, we'll talk through a few examples.

(00:09:53):
Maybe share one to give us context just like how much can you impact this sort of thing where you show up in, say, ChatGPT more often?

Ethan Smith (00:10:01):
You can affect it a lot. So a specific example with Webflow is we are working with Webflow on their SEO. We're working on their content, and we're seeing a lot of wins on the Answer Engine Optimization side.

(00:10:16):
So the specific things that we've done there, one is just traditional SEO. So make landing pages for high-search volume keywords, like best no-code website designer.

(00:10:28):
And then for free, you'll get Answer Engine Optimization impact from that. So that's just traditional SEO, which works very well for AEO.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:35):
I was just going to say, that sounds exactly the same as regular SEO.

Ethan Smith (00:10:38):
Yeah. So I would say everything that works in SEO works in AEO, but there are additional things beyond SEO that also work in AEO. So second thing, and the way that I think about AEO versus SEO is that the head and the tail are different. So the head is different in that in order to win something like what's the best website builder?

(00:10:59):
Even if Webflow's URL shows up number one on the citations, they're not going to win the answer because their URL showed up number one, but at Google they would win. If their blue link showed up first they would win, but that's not the case in the LLM. Because the LLM is summarizing many citations and so you need to get mentioned as many times as possible.

(00:11:18):
So usually when you ask something like, "What's the best tool for X?" The first answer will be mentioned the most in the citations, because that's very different from Google. And so for Webflow, we work with them on YouTube videos, Vimeo videos, getting mentioned in Reddit, getting mentioned in other blogs, affiliates, stuff like that.

(00:11:39):
So tried a bunch of stuff. Stuff that worked especially well was just straight SEO, number one. Number two is YouTube videos, and then the third is Reddit optimization.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:47):
Okay, wow. So you're saying if you can get to number one, when you ask ChatGPT, "What's the best website builder?"

(00:11:54):
And Webflow's at the top, that doesn't actually drive them as much traffic as simply being mentioned most often across the summary?

Ethan Smith (00:12:01):
Yes. And part of why that's interesting is because when startups come to me and ask me for SEO help, my first response is, "Don't do it at all. Spend your time on something else because you're not going to be able to grow SEO early on in search." Because you don't have enough domain authority and it takes a while to get domain authority, and only once you have domain authority can you rank.

(00:12:23):
And so for Google, it's usually something that you do Series A, Series B or later. You don't do it as soon as you start because can't win early on. That's not the case for Answer Engine Optimization, because you can get mentioned by a citation tomorrow and start showing up immediately. You can have a Reddit thread, you can have a YouTube video.

(00:12:42):
You can be mentioned on a blog, like a brand-new YC company launches, everyone's talking about them. They could show up in an answer tomorrow as a result of that. So early-stage companies can win, they can win quickly. And they can win quickly and anyone can win quickly, by getting mentioned as many times as possible by the citations. So that's what's different about the head.

(00:13:04):
What's different about the tail is that the tail is larger in chat than in search. So the average number of words, I think, Perplexity said this to somebody else, said that it was around 25 words, where versus Google words it's around six words. So the tail is just much, much larger. People are asking lots of follow-up questions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:19):
The tail, the prompt essentially, the question you're asking?

Ethan Smith (00:13:23):
Yes. Meaning that if you map out all of the questions that people ask, kind of like an SEO, long-tail keywords, if you do long-tail questions, the size of the tail is larger. Meaning the amount of questions that are very specific is larger, the share and the volume.

(00:13:42):
And there's probably questions that have never been asked before and questions that have never been searched before, because search can't support lots of really specific, super-specific stuff. Whereas chat is specifically made to ask a bunch of follow-up questions and have a conversation.

(00:13:58):
And so there's all these questions that have never been asked or searched for before that are now being asked, and then you can win that. And when I got started in SEO, it was long-tail SEO where you have a page for every single keyword, which doesn't work anymore, but now the long tail is back in chat.

(00:14:13):
And if you know all those really specific questions that people are asking, you can also win that, and you can probably also win that early. And I've seen examples of early-stage companies who just launched some really specific AI-enabled payment processing API thing, and they will show up. And they'll show up because they're answering questions that's never been answered before.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:35):
Are the leads that these answer engines are driving to companies actually valuable? Are these good-quality leads for B2B SaaS especially?

Ethan Smith (00:14:44):
They are significantly more valuable. So Webflow, we saw a 6X conversion rate difference between LLM traffic and Google Search traffic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:55):
Six times?

Ethan Smith (00:14:56):
Six times so significantly more qualified. I think that's probably for a couple of reasons. Probably it's because you're so primed because you're having a conversation with multiple follow-ups, and so there's so much intent that you've built.

(00:15:08):
And you've probably really narrowed in on what you want, so when you're going somewhere, it's probably highly qualified. And so we're seeing that it's just a much higher conversion rate.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:18):
Wow, this is so interesting, and it makes sense. People trust ChatGPT to tell them the answer, and if you are the answer, you have so much advantage. Like that is what people want to know, and then, "Okay. Cool, thank you. I'm going to go check this out."

(00:15:35):
This all just makes sense. Going back to the three levers you shared, essentially it's the things that you see work in driving you showing up more in these answer engines, landing pages, YouTube videos and Reddit. Is that right?

Ethan Smith (00:15:49):
Those are some of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:49):
Okay.

Ethan Smith (00:15:51):
The other things, so I would break it up into stuff on your site, onsite and offsite. So onsite would be traditional SEO. The difference would be this long tail. I would also say that the difference is lots of follow-up questions about does your product do this thing? What are the use cases, features, integrations, languages?

(00:16:07):
Tell me about your product and really specific details about that and that's on your site. And then the second group would be offsite, which is show up in all the citations. Citations are comprised of video, UGC like Reddit and Quora, affiliates.

(00:16:23):
Dotdash Meredith is showing up all over the place, Glamour, Good Housekeeping, it's like getting mentioned there, blogs, so it's those two groups.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:33):
And that all sounds very similar to SEO showing up on other people's pages. Showing links from, say, Reddit is always great.

(00:16:41):
It's interesting that Reddit is such a big deal. What's going on there do you think?

Ethan Smith (00:16:45):
Okay, Reddit is one of the most interesting things. It's hugely cited in LLMs. And it's probably the number one thing people are asking, customers are asking me is, "How do we optimize for Reddit?" And this goes back to the head of ChatGPT's question about, "Please don't spam my product."

(00:17:06):
And so Reddit is a community where it's real opinions from people, authentic, and it's heavily managed by the community and the community is very good at managing it. And so the obvious strategy for a growth person is, "Let's make a bunch of automated spam and spam Reddit all over the place and get my product to show up everywhere."

(00:17:27):
That's the growth mindset, which makes sense, the hustle mindset. So what are people looking at? They're looking at creating hundreds of fake Reddit accounts pretending to be someone that you're not. I have a single person, I'm going to make 100 Reddit accounts. I'm going to autopost comments and then like my own comments.

(00:17:46):
And then build a trust score, and then shout, say everywhere that my product is the best product. Fortunately, that doesn't work very well, but that's the obvious strategy. And so we're seeing people trying to do that and then we're also seeing those accounts get banned, those comments get deleted. And so we're seeing people trying to spam and being unsuccessful, so that's one strategy.

(00:18:05):
The other strategy is the whole purpose of Reddit is to post useful, high-quality, authentic comments from real people. So at Webflow, we have a couple of people at Webflow going to comments and saying, "This is my name, this is where I work, and here's a useful piece of information." So the strategy is find a thread that is a part of a citation that you want to show up in.

(00:18:30):
Say who you are, say where you work, and then give a useful piece of information, and that works really well. And that sounds simple if you're not in the growth mindset of, "I need to scale this to hundreds of comments." But you don't actually need 10,000 comments, even five could be great and that scales perfectly well.

(00:18:47):
So the Reddit strategy is the obvious strategy, which is just to be an actual user of Reddit. Make an account, say who you are, say where you work, and give a useful answer.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:56):
We had the early-growth leader from Deel, D-E-E-L, on the podcast a while ago. And this is how they grew initially, before AI even came around, just going big on Reddit and answering people's questions.

(00:19:07):
And like, "Hey, happens to be Deel. Can I help you with this problem?" So that's interesting. It's so interesting that Reddit is what is keeping ChatGPT from being spammed with stuff. It's not that ChatGPT is stopping the spam, its Reddit is just really good at that.

Ethan Smith (00:19:23):
I think that in a sense, ChatGPT is policing because ChatGPT is running a search, it's finding citations. There's a search algorithm that's trying to select which citations are useful. There are people at ChatGPT who are tuning their search algorithm to select which sources they trust.

(00:19:40):
I'm sure that there's a search evaluation team saying, "Do I like these citations, yes, no? Is Reddit showing up? I want it to show up." So I think that there are actual people at ChatGPT who are intentionally configuring their algorithm to use Reddit because it's trusted. And if it wasn't trusted, they wouldn't use it.

(00:19:57):
Same with Google. Google has specifically configured their search algorithm to rank Reddit and Twitter and Quora, because they want user-generated content. And if it wasn't good content, then they would change the algorithm and they wouldn't rank it. So I think that they are policing it in a sense.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:13):
Got it. And all of this is post-training, search-oriented features of these models. It's not data they are trained on, is that right?

Ethan Smith (00:20:24):
I would assume that so there's the core model and then there's RAG. So the core model is I'm looking at common crawl on billions of web pages, and then I'm retraining the model. And if you ask something like, "What's the capital of California?" It predicts the next word, which is Sacramento. And that's based on the core algorithm, which is next-word prediction.

(00:20:44):
Then there's RAG and RAG basically means search, retrieval-augmented generation. So I'm going to do a search and then I'm going to summarize the search. There are these two different things. And so most of what I'm describing is about the RAG piece, not the core model piece. To influence the core model is probably extremely hard and maybe you'll see the impact a year later.

(00:21:03):
And it's probably something, some sort of obscure thing that nobody would want to do, like make a million pages that say, "Best product for X is brand." Which I don't think most people want to spend their time on. So I'm mostly focused on the RAG side, because that's the main thing that's controllable.

(00:21:18):
And I think also the LLM is probably not going to say your product if it didn't show up anywhere on the RAG. So I think that's where most of the interesting stuff is from an optimization perspective.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:27):
Cool. Yeah. I didn't even think about this side of it when we started talking about this, but I think that's an important thing to note, is just this has nothing to do with the training data.

(00:21:34):
This is post-training, once the model's live, what it can do to find recent information using RAG, web search, things like that. Okay. Before we get into how to actually do this step-by-step, how to win at AEO.

(00:21:48):
What are two or three things that you think are important for people to understand to be successful in this world just broadly?

Ethan Smith (00:21:54):
First thing is just recognizing that this is related to search. So it's LLM plus RAG, it's summarizing a set of search results usually. So LLM plus RAG, number one. Number two is topics. So in search, a landing page is targeting hundreds of keywords, which we talked about on the last podcast.

(00:22:12):
So I'm not targeting one keyword like I was in 2007, I'm targeting 1,000 keywords, and each landing page needs to target that set of 1,000 keywords, and that's a topic. Same thing is true for Answer Engine Optimization. Each page is targeting hundreds, thousands, maybe tens of thousands of questions.

(00:22:28):
And so I want to group all those questions, which then brings us into content, so how would I rank? How would I get my URL to rank? Or how are other URLs being decided whether or not they rank? Then answer all the questions. The more of the questions that I answer, the better.

(00:22:42):
So in Google Search, if I have a landing page about website builders, the more that my page answers all of the subtopic, follow-up questions, the more likely I am to show up in Google Search. Same with chat, the more you answer all the questions, the better. If you don't answer a question, then you're probably not going to show up.

(00:22:57):
And if you answer a follow-up question and subtopic somebody else is not answering, you're going to be more likely to show up. So topics, number two. The third is question research, so how do I know which questions people are asking? And that's actually pretty hard, because in search, Google just tells you what their ads API.

(00:23:15):
They say, "This is the search volume for this keyword." There's a truth set from Google and ChatGPT is not giving us that, at least not yet. Maybe when they do ads, they'll give us more access to search volume, but there's no truth set. So how do we know the questions that people are asking?

(00:23:31):
One way would just be to take all my search terms and change them into questions. So website builder, you can assume that what's the best website builder is probably a question that's probably asked proportional to the search volume for that keyword, so that's one.

(00:23:44):
But then I mentioned that the tail is larger, and there's parts of the tail that don't exist in search. So how do we know what the tail looks like? And one strategy that you can use, is what are all the questions people are asking you on your sales calls, customer support on Reddit?

(00:24:02):
Mine all those questions that exist somewhere else. Probably those same questions are being asked in chat, so that's another way to find questions. The last is citation optimization or offsite. So again, the LLM is summarizing RAG. So how do we show up with as many citations as possible?

(00:24:21):
And you can break up the citations into different groups, my site, video, YouTube, Vimeo, UGC, Quora, Reddit. Tier-one affiliates like Dotdash, tier-two affiliates, blogs. So it's breaking up all those different citations and having specific strategies for each group.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:40):
What is Dotdash exactly?

Ethan Smith (00:24:42):
Dotdash Meredith is a large media conglomerate with Good Housekeeping, Allrecipes, Investopedia. It's probably the most successful SEO company of all time.

(00:24:53):
And it's also one of the most cited, probably the most cited in LLMs as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:59):
Wow, did not know this. As you talk, I think about if you go to Google, no offense, Mr. SEO, but if you go to Google these days, it's just like a bunch of unuseful stuff, just like this hyper SEO'ed content.

(00:25:12):
Do you think ChatGPT will be able to avoid that fate where it's just a bunch of hyper SEO'ed content that is not what you actually want?

Ethan Smith (00:25:19):
Probably. And what you're saying with SEO is that everyone's rewriting each other's content, nonexperts rewriting each other's content. So I get a content-scoring tool, which then looks at all the results in Google and it says, "These are all the things that the other articles are saying. And then this is what you haven't said yet, so here are recommendations for how to be more typical."

(00:25:40):
And then everyone rewrites each other's article. And then one other interesting thing is that the majority of landing pages drive no impact. So we did an analysis where one out of 20 landing pages drive roughly 85% of all your traffic. So 19 out of 20 landing pages drive little to no traffic, which means if I want to get ROI, I need to spend a small amount of money on a large number of pages.

(00:26:06):
And so then you get a nonexpert to say, "Rewrite this other person's article," because that's cheaper than hiring someone from The New York Times to write your article about what's the best payroll management software? But if you knew the few things that would work, the few landing pages that would work, and you wrote them really well, then you could push all that money to that one page, which is what we try to do.

(00:26:28):
But right now it's people rewriting each other's content, so Google has not solved that yet. That's probably a very hard problem to solve. Will they ever solve that? Probably. Will ChatGPT ever solve that? Probably. How I would solve that would be, one concept would be information gain. So did you say something that somebody else didn't say? Two is how typical are you?

(00:26:50):
Are you so typical that I think that you're a rewritten version of somebody else's content? Potentially, Google has EEAT, expertise, authority, trustworthiness, which actually I don't see having an effect unfortunately, but it could. And I could say, "Well, this person's an expert, this person's a certified financial advisor, rank them higher."

(00:27:08):
And I'm actually not seeing that, but they could increase the weight of that. So these are all potential solutions, but I'm sure that the reason why it has not been solved yet and why everyone's rewriting each other's articles. It's probably just hard to build an algorithm to solve that, but will they ever solve that? Probably.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:23):
This algorithm or heuristic you just shared is so interesting, because it's helpful for just what is good content, say, with a newsletter or a podcast? Info gain, and is it typical?

(00:27:34):
Are you adding something new to the conversation and is this unique? I think it's a really good strategy for just producing great newsletters and podcasts and all the content in the world.

Ethan Smith (00:27:45):
Yes. And ideally, did you do original research and do you have some domain expertise? And did you mention that in the content?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:51):
This is a great heuristic for just content in general, which is exactly what you want these algorithms to be looking for, so the alignment is there.

(00:27:59):
This episode is brought to you by Great Question, the all-in-one UX research platform loved by teams at Brex, Canva, Intuit and more. One of the most common things I hear from PMs and founders that I talk to is, "I know I should be speaking to customers more, but I just don't have the time or the tools." That's exactly the gap Great Question fills.

(00:28:18):
Great Question makes it easy for anyone on your team, not just researchers, to recruit participants, run interviews, send surveys, test prototypes, and then share it all with powerful video clips. It's everything you need to put your customers at the center of your product decisions. With a prompt as simple as, "Why did users choose us over competitors?"

(00:28:35):
Great Question not only reveals what your customers have already shared, but it also makes it incredibly easy to ask them in the moment for fresh insights from the right segment. Picture this, your roadmap's clear, your team's aligned, you're shipping with confidence, and you're building exactly what your customers need. Head to greatquestion.com/Lenny to get started.

(00:28:56):
Let's give people an actual, actionable plan to start executing on this and winning essentially at AEO. If it's helpful to use my newsletter as an example, how would I show up more often on ChatGPT or Gemini or whatever? Or if it's a B2B SaaS company, whatever's easiest, let's just talk about how to actually do this.

Ethan Smith (00:29:12):
First, I would figure out which questions I want to rank for. How I would figure out which questions I want to rank for, I would take my search data. I would maybe take my paid search data, like, "What are my money terms? What are my competitors' money terms?" So if I'm rippling, what is deal.com bidding all their paid search on?

(00:29:30):
Then I would transform those into questions. And actually you can just give those keywords to ChatGPT and say, "Make these into questions," and it does a pretty good job. So take your competitors' paid search data or mine or your own, put it in ChatGPT, get the questions. That's step one. Step two is then track them, so put them in an AEO tracker, in an answer tracker.

(00:29:51):
Third thing would be who is showing up as citations? And then have a strategy for each of those different groups of citations. The third would be make your own landing pages. So what are the kinds of landing pages that are appearing? Is it a listicle? Is it a category page? Is it an article, tool page? Figure out what page type that seem to be showing up the most, and then you make your own page for that.

(00:30:14):
How do you have your page rank? Answer all the follow-up questions. So what are all the follow-up questions that someone might ask? You could go back to your search data and look for groups and themes of your keywords that are in your SEO topic. Same thing for AEO topic. Then on the offsite, so different strategies for each of those groups.

(00:30:37):
And I would say that depending on the company, paying an affiliate to mention you, that's pretty easy if you have the money. So if you want to be the best credit card, you pay Forbes and then you're the best credit card. So that's strategy one, expensive, easy, controllable. The YouTube, Vimeo strategy is also actually pretty easy because there's no community saying, "I don't like your YouTube video."

(00:30:59):
You make a YouTube video, you do whatever you want. Maybe people view it, maybe they don't, but you can make a YouTube video or a Vimeo video. And the interesting thing with this, especially for B2B, is that YouTube, Vimeo, other video sites, the kinds of things people make videos for are food, traveling, fun, beauty.

(00:31:18):
There's not that many videos about AI-powered payment processing APIs, as interesting as that is, but it's a great money turn. So if you make a video for these really specific, high-LTV, maybe nonglamorous keywords, questions, topics, that's actually a big opportunity. Then Reddit, so I mentioned with Webflow what we did, which is just make a Reddit account, say who you are, say where you work and give a useful answer.

(00:31:48):
That one is a little bit trickier because the community might say, "I don't like your answer." So you can't guarantee that your comment is there, but it is easy, so I would do that group. Oh, and then experiment design, experiment design and seeing what works. So SEO and AEO are both interesting in that the majority of the information and best practices are not correct.

(00:32:13):
And the reason why is because people don't do analysis. Somebody will say something and then it will get repeated, and then it becomes best practice and no one ever did an analysis. So you did all the stuff that I just mentioned. Do an experiment and see if it worked. Maybe half the stuff I said works, maybe half it doesn't. Do your own experiment.

(00:32:32):
Most best practices, most blog posts are not correct. So how do you set up an experiment? You get your questions, you turn tracking on, give it a couple of weeks. Make your changes, have a test group, have a control group. Intervene on the test group, make your changes, see if the chart went up, see if the control group did not, and now you know your particular strategy worked.

(00:32:55):
So I would definitely do experiments and I would not assume that stuff you read online is correct. And then you need a team, so who's your team? Probably your team is your SEO team, or your SEO agency or your SEO consultant. Probably, hopefully they can do this stuff, and then however, what I think is hard to hire for is the offsite stuff.

(00:33:16):
So most SEO people are not going to be amazing at creating YouTube videos and Reddit strategy, so you might need a different person for that. That might be a community generalist marketing person. So it would basically be your SEO team, "Please now do Answer Engine Optimization." And then marketing community team, "Please help me show up in more citations."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:35):
Wow, okay. That is incredibly valuable. Thank you for sharing all that. I imagine some of this is you're just giving away a lot of amazing advice for free here. Thank you. First of all, I imagine there's a layer, there's only so far you can go on your own.

(00:33:49):
And so eventually it's like, "Okay, we really need help." And that's where a team like yours comes in. Let me ask a few questions here to follow up. One is this tracker concept. So what is this tracker, it can track how often you show up? Say Lenny's Newsletter shows up and answers for the questions that I'm targeting?

Ethan Smith (00:34:03):
Yeah, so there's answer tracking, which is like keyword tracking. So keyword tracking would be best growth podcast, and you put that in a keyword tracking tool. There's 100 of them, they're all the same, and you see whether or not what you rank. Maybe you rank, hopefully you rank number one. Now in answers it's very different, but it's related.

(00:34:25):
So if you ask the same question, you will have different answers each time. If you ask a question, there's different answers per run. And so ChatGPT is basically calculating a distribution of all the potential answers it would give. And depending on when you ask it, it's basically like a weighted, random sample, and so you're going to get different answers.

(00:34:46):
You also have question variants, so you can ask different versions of the same question, and you might show up in one and you might not show up in another. Then there's different surfaces, there's Perplexity, there's Gemini, there's ChatGPT, there's Meta AI, and so these surfaces have different answers.

(00:35:00):
And so you essentially need to create a share of voice across all these different things like a distribution. So how often am I showing up? What's my average rank? And that's answer tracking. So then where do you get answer tracking? And answer tracking is essentially an evolution of keyword tracking. So we have a page with 60 different answer tracking tools.

(00:35:22):
But it's ultimately just like keyword tracking, it's all the same thing roughly. And so pick one of the 60, we have answer tracking, we're building answer tracking. There's 59 other options, probably all pretty good, probably all pretty similar, but pick one. My general suggestion is pick the cheapest one that does what you need.

(00:35:41):
Just like keyword tracking, you can only, there's not a premium version of keyword tracking. You rank number three or you don't. So pick the keyword tracker that is the cheapest that does what you want. Same with the answer tracking. And so then when I'm doing the experiment, put your answers in, track them, see a chart over time, see your average rank.

(00:35:58):
How often are you showing up and what's your average rank? And then you make a change, and then hopefully you go up.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:03):
Amazing. I love this term voice share. I never heard that before, it makes sense. Like percentage of time you're showing up in LLMs, is there an LLM, is it just like ChatGPT?

(00:36:13):
Is Google equivalent now to ChatGPT? How do you recommend people think about, say, Gemini or Claude, or Perplexity and others?

Ethan Smith (00:36:21):
So interestingly, there are similar, foundational algorithms across all of these. They're all using search, they're all using search, and they're all using LLMs, which foundational algorithms are all the same. The results are actually pretty different. So we're doing a study, we're seeing that Google and Bing are not that similar search engines.

(00:36:41):
We're seeing that ChatGPT citations and Google Search results are actually not that similar. Perplexity is interestingly more similar to Google than ChatGPT. We did a study looking at thousands of questions and saw the citation overlap with Google Search results was around 35% for ChatGPT and Google, so not that much.

(00:37:02):
Perplexity was around 70%, but essentially they're all similar algorithms, but with very different citations and results. So then look at which surfaces have the most traffic and then track those. You probably don't need to track all of them, but look across all those.

(00:37:17):
But you do need to look at your share of voice or the percent of time you show up across all these surfaces. You need to ask the question multiple times, and you need to ask the variance of the question to truly know how frequently you're showing up.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:28):
Considering that ChatGPT, they're going to hit something like a billion weekly active users in the near future, do you need to worry about Claude and Gemini and Perplexity?

(00:37:39):
Is the traffic there meaningful? I know it is a lot of people, but how important is it to focus on those other LLMs?

Ethan Smith (00:37:45):
Well, the way that I would answer that is I believe AOL was one of the largest search engines early on and Google was not. And so we could ask in 1999 or whatever, "Should we just focus on AOL search and Yahoo search? Do we really need to worry about Google?" And the answer is we don't actually know.

(00:38:04):
It's very early, we don't know who's going to win. I do think that ChatGPT for sure is going to be large. Will Perplexity or Claude or these others compete with them? Probably. Just like search, I think that there will probably be multiple winners and probably you'll need to optimize for several.

(00:38:18):
I don't think that you'll need to optimize for 10, but there'll probably be around three or so that will win that you want to optimize for.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:26):
Okay. By the way, I want to make it clear, I love Claude. I use Claude and ChatGPT equally, roughly. I didn't want to make it sound like ChatGPT is the only product people use.

(00:38:34):
Okay. How does this strategy change depending on the kind of company you are? Say you're a B2B SaaS company or a consumer product, does anything in these seven steps change significantly?

Ethan Smith (00:38:44):
Let's take B2B, for example. The first thing is that the citations that are being mentioned are going to be quite different. So citation optimization will vary quite a bit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:53):
Just to clarify what you just said, what do you mean when you say citation strategy is different?

Ethan Smith (00:38:57):
Meaning the citations that show up for B2B versus marketplaces are different kinds of citations. So for B2B, it might be like TechRadar shows up a ton when I ask questions. I've never read TechRadar, but for some reason it shows up all the time. I'm sure it's great. But TechRadar is showing up a ton for B2B for whatever reason.

(00:39:19):
In commerce, it's not going to be that, it's going to be Glamour and Cosmopolitan. For marketplaces, it'll be Eater and Yelp, TripAdvisor, places like that, so the kinds of citations that show up are different. Most of the stuff that I've been talking about is specific to B2B stuff that's different for commerce.

(00:39:38):
So for most B2B questions, the answers are not clickable. There's nothing to click on. And so if you actually want to measure the impact, you cannot just look at last-touch referral traffic. You have to see whether or not you showed up in the answer with tracking. And then you also need to ask the user, "How did you hear about us post-conversion to actually know the impact?"

(00:40:00):
So it's harder to track for B2B. Also for B2B, you're probably deciding which payroll management software to use after 50 touchpoints. With a brand, it's not going to be you just search for something, you suddenly spent $100,000 on payroll management software. So that's B2B. Commerce is different, so Commerce actually now has more clickable cards like you would in a Google.

(00:40:21):
So if you ask, "What's the best TV for apartments?" There are actual shoppable cards. Those shoppable cards are showing multiple sellers. Those sellers have rich snippets. Schema is important, the number of reviews are important, so it's actually quite different. You can look at last-touch referral traffic to get a good sense about the number of conversions that you're getting.

(00:40:44):
For commerce, similar with restaurants and hotels and local marketplaces, similar there. And then I would say early stage is also different. So I mentioned earlier, early stage my recommendation is don't do SEO at all. For Answer Engine Optimization, definitely do AEO, and only do citation optimization and long tail. Don't do any of the mid-SEO stuff, just get cited and answer really specific questions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:12):
It's so interesting that so much of this is just showing up as the little tag/pill in the answer, because it's obvious now that I think about it.

(00:41:21):
That's the only way someone will get to your site from an LLM is just clicking that, "Okay, let me go read this article."

Ethan Smith (00:41:27):
Yes. But what they will do is they will open a new tab, and they will type in the brand name and they'll go to Google.

(00:41:33):
And then they'll click on your domain, and you will think that it was a branded Google Search when it wasn't.

(00:41:38):
Or they'll open up a new tab and they will type in your domain, and they'll go directly to your domain and you'll falsely think that it was direct traffic.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:46):
Coming back to a question you raised at the beginning. So for my newsletter, the fact that they're sucking up all this content, I don't even know how much, and sending me some percent of traffic.

(00:41:55):
Do you have any, I don't know, just sense of is this good? If you were running my newsletter, would you encourage all these outlets to suck up my stuff? And then be like, "Oh yeah, you could check it out in Lenny's Newsletter if you want"?

Ethan Smith (00:42:08):
Yes. And I would give the same answer that Brian Balfour gave on your previous episode on this, which is that it's not your choice whether to play the game. You are playing the game whether you want to or not, so you might as well try to show up. If you just say, "Don't look at any of my data," then you cannot show up and your competitors will.

(00:42:27):
Now, what you can do is you can say, "I don't want you to train on my data, so you can index my site, but please don't train on my data." And they have different user agents for that and different bots, so you can just say, "And we're building a Webflow app to block training but not indexation."

(00:42:43):
Or you can just put it in your robots.txt, "This training bot not allowed. Index bot, you are allowed." So if you're concerned about that, I would suggest that, and I think probably a lot of people will do that. But saying, "You can't index my site at all," that doesn't make sense to me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:57):
Such a good point, because I don't know if I have competitors in this exact space, but basically they would show up instead and then I lose all that traffic.

Ethan Smith (00:43:05):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:06):
Such a good point. Okay. Let me come back to the steps you shared just to see if there's something here that's worth diving into a little further. So this is essentially how to be more successful showing up in LLM responses. One is figure out what questions you want to rank for.

(00:43:19):
And you could do this by looking at what your competitors are advertising and their paid ads and things like that. Just look at the terms, ask almost ChatGPT or Claude, "Turn these into questions people would ask to find these terms." Then set up a tracker to see just how you're doing today. How often are you showing up?

(00:43:36):
There's a million trackers, you have a link willing to check these out. Then you look at who is showing up today? Where are they being taken today? Use that to inform landing pages that you create to answer those questions better. And you make it very clear that it's very important not to just answer that main question, but also follow-up questions. Then there's offsite stuff.

(00:43:57):
So get into affiliates like Dotdash, YouTube, Reddit, Quora sounds like are the core, and then run an experiment. So you look at this tracker, and let me actually ask this, and the next step is just set up a team. But just to come back to this step, how do you set up an experiment that isn't just like a before, after? How do you do a control group situation?

Ethan Smith (00:44:19):
Yeah. So what I would do is I would take 100 different questions, half of them I will intervene, half of them I won't. Or let's say, let's take 200 questions. So 100 of the questions, I'm not going to do anything, so that's my control group. And we are seeing a fair amount of variance and answers just without doing anything at all, so you definitely want a control group.

(00:44:40):
And also we're seeing people are using LLMs more and LLM traffic is going up. So you definitely need a control group, especially in Answer Engine Optimization. So control group is, "Don't touch it at all, leave it as it is." That's the control group. Test group would be, "I'm going to now comment on Reddit threads, so let's test that."

(00:44:57):
Or I'm now going to make a YouTube, Vimeo video, or I'm now going to pay Forbes advisor to say that I'm the best credit card. Maybe break those up into a few different buckets, track them. Have a couple of weeks before, a couple of weeks after, compare against the control group.

(00:45:11):
And then the stuff that went up when the control group did not worked, and the stuff that didn't did not, and then reproduce it. So reproducibility is very important. And my background's in academic research, and it's common to do a study that cannot be reproduced. And so for something to truly be accepted with an academian, it needs to be reproducible.

(00:45:34):
Meaning multiple people have done this study and reproduced that thing over and over again. And especially in SEO, it's common for something to change. And you think that it was this thing that caused it and it's actually not, and you just assume forever that that works. So reproducibility is very important.

(00:45:49):
Try to do that study multiple times, try to get studies from other people, and if it works 10 times, then it probably works. And this comes back to the waste problem, most work is wasted in SEO. Most work is wasted in AEO, so how do you know what's not wasted? You do an experiment, you don't assume that what you read online is true.

(00:46:07):
You do your own experiment, and then you reproduce it multiple times, and keep doing the stuff that works and don't do the stuff that doesn't.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:15):
It feels like such a big deal to win at AEO. Just coming back to this idea that people are coming to ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini looking for an answer.

(00:46:25):
If you're that answer, I feel like that could just make or break your company. It feels like even more important than SEO, just getting this right.

Ethan Smith (00:46:33):
I would say that where I want to get the most conversions possible, how big is the channel? The channel is not as big as search. The search is definitely larger, but it is a substantial channel now. And Webflow, they get 8% of those signups from LLMs.

(00:46:50):
It's now one of your top channels so it's large. It's not the largest channel, it's not the number one channel. Paid is probably the number one channel, but it's definitely a substantially large channel and one worth optimizing for.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:02):
And as you said, probably growing over time.

Ethan Smith (00:47:04):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:05):
Okay. Let me zoom out a little bit, and let me just ask you this.

(00:47:08):
What do you think are maybe the most surprising or underdiscussed topics when it comes to AI and SEO and AEO that we haven't already talked about?

Ethan Smith (00:47:18):
The first thing is that there's significant misinformation on AI and on AEO, and it's pretty extreme. It's unusually the percent of misinformation to correct information is pretty substantial. So one example is every two years there's news articles about how Google Search is going to die or it is dying because there's a new thing.

(00:47:42):
So that's happening right now with AI Overviews and with AEO, Google's going down, which is not true. Before that it was TikTok search, so everyone is using TikTok now. Gen Z is using TikTok, they're never going to use SEO. SEO's going to be dead, and so you really need to focus on TikTok search, which is not false. It's not untrue, but it's not taking share away from Google, it's just a new surface.

(00:48:05):
And then before that it was Instagram, and then before that it was Facebook and it was YouTube. And people do search and discover on Instagram, TikTok, YouTube, but it doesn't take away from Google Search. It adds on top of it. These are all new channels, so Google's slice of the pie stays the same, the pie gets bigger.

(00:48:23):
And so misinformation about Google going down, Google is not going down. Google published something recently, their VP of search explicitly said, "I looked at the traffic that we're sending to publishers, and it is not down, it's up slightly." So it is not true that Google Search is going down.

(00:48:37):
And most of the news information about that is saying that it's going down, so that's the first surprising thing. The second surprising thing is tooling. And I've never seen a channel where these extremely expensive tools that essentially do commodity tasks. So imagine if I said, "I'm going to charge you $50,000 for keyword tracking."

(00:48:59):
You would say, "Well, of course, that's absurd. It's keyword tracking, I could write this in a day." No one would do that. But for answer engines, it's mysterious and people don't really know how it's working. Also, the slope of the growth curve is so significant, that I'm seeing people spend huge amounts of money on what are essentially keyword tracking commodities.

(00:49:19):
So that's the second thing. The third thing is the growth curve of the channel. And we did a Reforge AEO webinar a year ago, and there was excitement and then it died and there was very little excitement about it. This was in June, and then people didn't really care. They were intrigued intellectually by it, but they didn't care because they didn't see the impact from that.

(00:49:40):
So there was essentially very little interest between July and January, and then suddenly in January it's just skyrocketing. So it's ChatGPT launches, people are very interested, and then it's not that interesting for growth people. And then there's this little spike in June, and then it's like this, which is usually not what you see with a new channel.

(00:50:01):
So the slope of the curve is unusually steep, and the shape of the curve is also very unusual. The last is that a lot of people do think that SEO and AEO are different and they're not different. I think probably part of that is because it sounds great to say that there's this new channel, it's completely different.

(00:50:23):
And I'm an expert and I have a tool to sell you, and it's totally unique and all these other tools are not relevant. In reality, it's actually there's quite a bit of overlap. There is the difference of the citation optimization. The head is different and the tail is different, but the core technology is pretty similar. So those are probably the most surprising things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:43):
This piece about January being the inflection point, you mentioned that it was because references started showing it more prominently. Is that the big change?

Ethan Smith (00:50:51):
I think it's increase of adoption of LLMs by people, so it's just actually growing more and then the clickability. And I am seeing, you are seeing now this large increase of actual clicks.

(00:51:02):
Probably before you got no clicks, even if you showed up an answer, so the clickability of the answer has increased.

(00:51:08):
Especially for things like commerce and local and hotels, because they have these rich modules where you can click on stuff and go somewhere, which was not true before. That and I think people are just using LLMs more.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:20):
Ethan, let me just say, I'm learning so much from this conversation, what a fun thing. I could see, it's just clear how much you love this stuff, and just how nerdy and deep you get into it. And it's just fun to talk to someone that's so deep and knowledgeable about all these things, so thank you for sharing all this with us.

(00:51:36):
I'm going to go in a slightly different direction. There's this whole world of AI content, people generating content with AI, generating landing pages. Just like, "Oh my God, SEO is never going to just generate all this stuff. AI is going to make all this stuff easier."

(00:51:48):
You guys did a really big study on how that works, whether it's a good idea to generate content with AI. Can you just talk about what you learned from that, and how people should think about AI in generating content?

Ethan Smith (00:51:59):
Yes. So I remember when ChatGPT launched and Brian Balfour posted on LinkedIn, "What do you people think that is going to happen from ChatGPT and AI?" And my immediate response is spam, so just lots and lots of spam, especially SEO spam. And then there was a whole industry around AI-generated content, and I knew immediately that it wouldn't work.

(00:52:20):
And the reason why I knew it wouldn't work, and when I say AI-generated content, I mean automated content with no human-in-the-loop. So I think that the future of content is clearly AI-assisted. Clearly, you and I will be using AI to help us write, so it's not no AI at all, but it's not 100% generated with AI. I immediately knew that it wouldn't work.

(00:52:38):
Why did I know that? I knew that because I created spam in 2007, and I knew what Google did about it and how, and I knew the exact same thing was going to happen. So what I did in 2007 is I and all the other shopping comparison people scraped all each other's content, reviews, chopped it up, scraped content, 100 million search pages, snippets, and it worked really well.

(00:53:02):
And then it stopped working, and then all those companies disappeared. I knew that was exactly what's going to happen with AI-generated content. And so from the beginning, I've not focused on AI-generated content. Many people have, but I don't know, so maybe it does work. There's lots of case studies about it working.

(00:53:20):
So let's do the study, let's do an analysis. So we took, we looked at both Google and at ChatGPT where we took thousands of searches and thousands of questions, and we put those searches into Google Search. We put those questions into chat and the ChatGPT, and then we looked at the citations or the Google Search results. Then we looked at an AI detector.

(00:53:43):
So we used Surfer SEO's AI detector. Now, when I tell people this, they say, "Well, you can't detect AI." So then we evaluated the efficacy and the accuracy of the AI detector. So we did that by generating thousands of AI-generated articles and it was very predictive. And then we looked at real articles, we did that two different ways.

(00:54:05):
One way is we write real articles, and the other is we took a random sample of 100,000 URLs from Common Crawl over the last five years. And then we looked at the AI detector before ChatGPT was launched, so it necessarily was content not created by a human. And then the false positive rate was around 8%, so basically the AI detector is very accurate.

(00:54:29):
So we took that, then we ran it on the content. So then what we saw was around 10% to 12% of content in Google Search, and then ChatGPT or AI-generated, 90% are not. And we ran a correlation analysis showing the exact same thing. So we essentially did a very rigorous study showing that AI content does not work. AI-assisted content edited is great.

(00:54:52):
We do that sometimes, other people do that, that is clearly the future of content. So that does work and should work and that's good, but purely 100% AI-generated does not work. So then the second thing that we did was we found that, this was unexpected, but we found that there's more AI-generated content on the internet than human-generated content.

(00:55:13):
So back to the Common Crawl study, we looked at 100,000 different URLs over the past five years. And then you can see this curve where AI-generated is now higher than human-created. So there's more AI-generated content on the internet than human-generated content, which is disturbing. So then let's say that AI-generated content did work.

(00:55:32):
If AI-generated content worked, then everyone would do it. Just like in 2007, shopping comparison sites, if I can scrape my content, why would I pay anyone to write it? I'll just scrape it from you and I'll chop it up. So then everyone will do that, and then it will go from most content is AI-generated to almost all of the content is AI-generated.

(00:55:51):
Then what will happen if that works, is that Google now becomes a search engine for ChatGPT responses. So if Google's a search engine for ChatGPT responses, there's no reason for Google to exist. Just go to ChatGPT, which is the exact same thing that happened in 2007.

(00:56:04):
Google said, "I see all these shopping comparison search engines showing up in my search results. So I'm essentially a search engine for search engines." I should be showing the TV in my results. I shouldn't be showing other vertical search engines, so I'm going to get rid of them and I'm just going to go straight to the product.

(00:56:23):
The same thing will be true for ChatGPT. Now for ChatGPT, let's say that ChatGPT ranks its own derivatives in its citations, so then you have this infinite loop of derivatives. So I go to ChatGPT, I say, "Generate 10 articles." I put those articles into the citations and then I say, "Summarize these citations that were derivative."

(00:56:41):
And then I keep on doing derivatives of derivatives, and then you have an infinite loop of derivatives, and now AI is summarizing itself. There's a paper about this called Model Collapse. So again, there's the core algorithm and then there's the RAG piece. So the core algorithm, a group did a study showing model collapse, which was what if you feed in AI derivatives into the model and train the core model on the derivatives?

(00:57:06):
And then what happened was you had all these problems, hallucinations, things break very quickly. Okay. So then we did a study on what if you feed derivatives into the RAG piece? So generate 10 derivatives, put that into RAG, summarize that. And then generate 10 more, and then summarize my summarizations, infinite loop of derivatives. What happens?

(00:57:25):
And so what happens is there's a wisdom of the crowd. The LLM is summarizing the opinion of many people. So if you ask a question like, "What's the best flavor of ice cream?" There's not one answer, there's thousands of opinions. So the LLM is summarizing these many, many opinions in this wisdom of the crowd.

(00:57:40):
And the wisdom of the crowd basically says that, "If you take the average of a large group of people, their average response will be better than the best single individual in the group." And so it's better to have more diversity of opinions, wisdom of the crowd. So what happens to the infinite loop of derivatives? You essentially converge on one opinion.

(00:58:00):
So if you ask, "What's the best flavor of ice cream?" It will eventually say, "It's vanilla and it's only vanilla, and there's no other flavor of ice cream." And so that's a simple example, but if you feed in derivatives of derivatives into the model, you'll basically take the wisdom of the crowd.

(00:58:15):
And that will shrink and you'll have a single opinion on everything, which is really bad. So that's what happens if AI content, 100% unassisted AI content works.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:25):
I'm afraid of this world where everything is trained on AI, and AI is trained on AI and generating AI, and just like nothing is trusted. And I love how it's interesting just how much of these incentives are driving this.

(00:58:36):
If ChatGPT was finding this valuable, this is what people do and then just goes off the rails. So there's just some team there that is keeping this from happening. How do you think this evolves?

(00:58:46):
If you were them, what would you do over the next few years to keep things high quality and not drive these perverse incentives?

Ethan Smith (00:58:55):
So I would identify what the perverse incentives might be, and AI-generated content is one of them. The second thing is I think that LLMs and search are going to converge. And so you're seeing that with Google Search where they're having LLM, AI Overviews. You're seeing that with LLMs where they're incorporating maps and shopping carousels, and it's converging on search.

(00:59:14):
I think it'll converge on a single experience, so that's the first thing. Figure out what 2007 Ethan would do not to create spam and make sure that he doesn't do that, like AI-generated content or it's great content. That'd the second thing. And the third thing is there's all these other interesting features, use cases that LLMs can be great for.

(00:59:33):
So LLMs could be great for remembering everything that you've ever asked. It could be good for personalizing stuff specifically to Lenny. One interesting use case that I think will eventually come would be, I say, "Plan a trip to San Francisco," and decisions are made for you without any intervention. I have this wonderful EA named Jen.

(00:59:51):
And I say, "Jen, I'm going to Miami. Please, just do everything for me," and she does everything for me. She knows me, she knows my preferences, she knows that I want a ocean view and I want a restaurant with music. She does all of that and I don't have to intervene. AI can essentially do that eventually, and that would do that because it would deeply understand you.

(01:00:09):
It would remember everything about you. It would have context, it would have a reasoning, and then it would be able to make all these decisions without your intervention, which would be autonomous agents. So I think that that's also another very interesting place for someone like me to optimize for as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:25):
Yeah. I was just going to say, just imagine not even being told this is what you're choosing. Like, "Oh, and go check out, subscribe to the best newsletter out there." And if you're out there, the good things will happen.

(01:00:36):
Wow, what a wild world. Is there anything else that we haven't covered that you think would be helpful to folks that are trying to get better at this stuff? Try to take the first steps down this road of AEO?

Ethan Smith (01:00:49):
Yes, the most exciting topic, which is help center optimization and support.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:53):
Sweet.

Ethan Smith (01:00:54):
So I mentioned that people in chat are asking follow-up questions. They're looking for tools. Do you have this feature, this use case, this integration? And that frequently can be answered in help centers. Usually, you would not have an SEO team and say, "We really want you guys to focus on the help center."

(01:01:14):
But in chat, since there's all these questions about can you do this thing, can you fulfill my use case? A help center is actually a great place to do that, and so I think how can you optimize the help center? So number one is it's frequently on a subdomain. For whatever reason, subdomains don't work as well as subdirectories, so move it to a subdirectory, number one.

(01:01:33):
Number two is make sure that you're cross-linking well. So usually you do not have optimized internal links, so link from help center page to help center page, make sure there's lots of cross-linking. The third is you probably have help center content about the head, but the tail you probably don't have any help center content for.

(01:01:51):
So an example of this is I was looking for, I wanted to track our sales calls and look to see who was in the meeting and what the sentiment was. And I wanted to put that into Looker, so I said, "Which meeting transcription tool integrates with Looker?" And the answer is none of them, but you could use Otter because Otter has a Zapier integration.

(01:02:15):
You could send a Zap of the meeting, put it into BigQuery, and then do Looker on top of that. But there wasn't a help center article about that because it's a very obscure use case, but it's not a zero use case. And so the tail, there's going to be a bunch of questions in the tail that you may not have help center articles for.

(01:02:31):
So again, what are the questions in sales calls? What are the questions that you're seeing in customer support? Having pages for that, I might even open up to the community. Anyone can ask anything because the community will then fill on the tail and then answer those.

(01:02:46):
And again, in many cases there might be nobody talking about this at all. So you could be the only citation for this, and then win that tail of questions.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:55):
Are there any help desk, I don't know, system software that are just making this easier yet? Or do you think that's an opportunity for, say, Zendesk or Intercom?

Ethan Smith (01:03:02):
I think probably all of them should work perfectly well. I think that the only thing you need to do is cross-linking and subdirectory rather than subdomain, which probably most of them do. So I think that they should all work for free.

(01:03:12):
That the main thing you would want to do would be, again, open it up to the community and make sure that you fill in the tail. But probably all those tools should be good for this.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:19):
Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you, Ethan. Are you ready?

Ethan Smith (01:03:24):
I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:25):
What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Ethan Smith (01:03:30):
Number one is Emotional Intelligence, and people talk about the concept of emotional intelligence, but there's actual research and psychology around that. I believe it was published in the '80s, but there's a really good book that summarizes the foundational research around emotional intelligence. And it's very useful when building relationships and communicating with people to understand their emotions. So that's the first one. And doing growth because growth is getting people to use your stuff. And so if you have frameworks to inform how people will use your things, then you can be a more effective growth person. Which brings me to my second book, which is Cialdini's Persuasion book. Robert Cialdini does a bunch of books around persuasion, but again, there's frameworks for how to persuade somebody to sign up, buy something. And so he breaks down his framework for that, and again, it's based on psychology. And I think especially in growth, there's all kinds of psychology research and behavioral economics research to inform tests.

(01:04:25):
And if you just read Thinking, Fast and Slow, Persuasion, Emotional Intelligence, you can basically take those frameworks and apply it to growth in all kinds of different ways. And then the last is How to Measure Anything. So How to Measure Anything is about measuring things that are not immediately obvious to measure.

(01:04:42):
They give this example of they wanted to measure how good an orchestra conductor was and they could survey or they could see the number of standing ovations for each orchestra conductor. And the more standing ovations probably means it's this better one and that you don't need to survey people.

(01:04:58):
But much of growth and business is things that are not immediately obvious for how to measure, but anything could be measured, and so that's my third record.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:06):
Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Ethan Smith (01:05:09):
I don't really watch TV, but I watch two different groups of things. I watch really aggressive sports, so I really like Michael Jordan documentary, Last Dance. I like Lance Armstrong documentaries about how aggressive and confrontational he is, and I love watching UFC. I like extreme aggression and intensity. The other group of stuff that I like to watch are climbing documentaries.

(01:05:34):
So anything that Alex Honnold, Jimmy Chan do, I watch all that, which is the exact opposite of aggressive sports. So it's zen, being present, slow-and-steady craftsmanship. But this is how I approach my work, which is extreme intensity and aggressiveness, and then the zen craftsmanship, being present.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:57):
I love how this explains why people love working with you and why you're good at this, is like this competitiveness and also just the super nerdiness to get really knowledgeable about how this stuff works.

(01:06:09):
And then I didn't think about the zen element of it, just lik staying calm throughout it all.

Ethan Smith (01:06:13):
Flow, flow state.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:15):
Flow, what a funny microcosm of why you're so good at this.

Ethan Smith (01:06:19):
Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:19):
Okay, I'm going to keep going. Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Ethan Smith (01:06:24):
This camera and this microphone. So I got a Sony mirrorless SLR, I forget which one. But, sorry, getting a mirrorless SLR with a wide-angle lens really transforms your video calls. And then I have this Shure microphone and I think it's like $180.

(01:06:46):
This dramatically improves the quality of my video call. And I like to design things and you can design your video calls and you can make them amazing. You can have flowers in the background, over here, some sunflowers.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:00):
Beautiful.

Ethan Smith (01:07:00):
So my favorite products are my SLR camera that I use for video calls and my microphone.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:07):
Your background is quite exquisite and I didn't mention that, but it looks beautiful. Okay, two more questions.

(01:07:13):
Do you have a life motto that you find really useful in work or in life?

Ethan Smith (01:07:19):
There's the Outliers book about 10,000 hours. And the themes there are you don't have to be the smartest, you have to be sufficiently smart, number one. Number two is focused practice, so it's not just trying hard, it's doing it in an intentional, focused way. And the third thing is lots of practice, so no one can master anything because they're a genius.

(01:07:44):
They master it because they spent a significant amount of time practicing and they practice in an intentional way. And so my motto is essentially a combination of those things, which is that I'm not going to necessarily win because my brain is the largest brain or that I tried the hardest.

(01:08:00):
It's because I'm going to be the most intentional about my practice, and I'm going to be as intense as I possibly can be about that practice.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:08):
Okay, final question. I'm curious if there's just like an SEO or even an AEO win, you're just most proud of?

(01:08:15):
That you always think about, "Wow, I can't believe I pulled that off. I can't believe the impact we had there"?

Ethan Smith (01:08:19):
I always liked the example of butter lettuce with MasterClass. Because MasterClass, when I was first working with them, they did not have nearly as much authority as Allrecipes and Martha Stewart. And I actually didn't know if I should take the project because I thought it might be too hard.

(01:08:37):
But I did the project and it was hard, but we were able to rank really competitively and way better than I expected. And I think it's probably because of all these specific, little execution details. But butter lettuce was my favorite one, and I like butter lettuce, so I can search for butter lettuce and I can get a recipe on MasterClass.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:55):
That's amazing. I don't know if butter lettuce has been mentioned on this podcast before. Ethan, this was incredible. This was everything I was hoping it'd be.

(01:09:03):
I feel like we've just leveled up everyone's knowledge on what the hell is happening with SEO and AEO? Forget about GEO.

(01:09:09):
Two final questions, where can folks find you if they want to potentially work with you guys? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Ethan Smith (01:09:15):
So where you can find me, number one, is on LinkedIn. I spend lots of time on LinkedIn and I publish original, so we do original research. We have a whole research team hypothesizing and evaluating those hypotheses. So we publish, all the studies that I mentioned, we publish on our site and I publish them on LinkedIn.

(01:09:33):
So follow me on LinkedIn, add me on LinkedIn, send me a message. LinkedIn, number one, and then number two is we have a blog which we call The 5%. So /5%, which stands for 5% of work, 5% of landing pages drive almost all the impact, so that's the theme. This is only useful stuff. So our blog at 5%, you could subscribe to our email and to our studies. And then how can people be useful to me?

(01:09:58):
So I spent time thinking about this and there's two ways people can help me. The first way is that there's not that much research around what works in AEO, and I would love to know what people are testing and what the results are and what works. So people doing studies and publishing that are sending it to me, I would love as much analysis and research as possible, number one.

(01:10:20):
Then the second one is to help me on LinkedIn by commenting on my posts and on my comments. So you posted most recently the Brian Balfour episode, for which I wrote a long, thoughtful comment, and then I got about 25 likes and then I got responses to that. And so I've been commenting on other people's LinkedIn posts and I've been writing these long LinkedIn posts.

(01:10:43):
And when people comment, it boosts the engagement within LinkedIn and then I get mass distribution. So the more people and thoughtful comments, so not this is great, but a long, thoughtful comment that stimulates conversation. So if people comment on my posts, then I'm just going to blow up on LinkedIn and I might be as big as you someday.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:01):
I love how tactical his ask is. It's something Bryan Johnson I noticed is really good at on Twitter, the longevity guy.

(01:11:08):
He just replies to tweets in a really funny way and feels like that's a big growth channel for him. So I love that you have this in common with Bryan Johnson.

Ethan Smith (01:11:16):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:17):
Also, just to point people to your domain, graphite.io, is that the right domain?

Ethan Smith (01:11:21):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:21):
Amazing. Ethan, thank you so much for sharing so much with us and for being here.

Ethan Smith (01:11:27):
Absolutely. It's good to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:29):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app.

(01:11:38):
Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Fareed Mosavat (00:00:00):
You can't do homework. You can't do exercises. You can't do fake stuff. You have to work on real products at real companies with real customers, with real data to get better at product management. So any kind of training, mentorship, reading, et cetera that you do is just a layer on top of that. The real acceleration happens from doing it and getting more reps. There are ways that I think great PMs use to go faster on this loop, but you still have to do the work. At the core is you have to actually execute and deliver great products, and you have to do it over, and over, and over again.

Lenny (00:00:40):
Fareed Mosavat is the Chief Development Officer at Reforge where he's been for over two and a half years. Before that, he spent three and a half years at Slack leading a lot of their growth efforts, about a year at Instacart leading a number of their key growth analytics and product efforts. He's a GM at Zynga, he's VP of Product at Runkeeper, and something that I only learned during our chat is that he spent six years at Pixar doing character simulation, rigging, and building 3D animation tools. In our conversation, we focus on the journey of becoming a great PM, including crossing the canyon from IC to manager, the importance of expanding your scope, and how to create opportunities where you get more responsibility as a PM. Fareed is such an A-plus human full of so much insight, and I'm really excited for you to learn from him. With that, I bring you Fareed Mosavat.

Lenny (00:01:32):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. Coda is an all-in-one doc that combines the best of documents, spreadsheets, and apps in one place. I actually use Coda every single day. It's my home base for organizing my newsletter writing. It's where I plan my content calendar, capture my research, and write the first drafts of each and every post. It's also where I curate my private knowledge repository for paid newsletter subscribers, and it's also how I manage the workflow for this very podcast.

Lenny (00:01:59):
Over the years, I've seen Coda evolve from being a tool that makes teams more productive to one that also helps bring the best practices across the tech industry to life with an incredibly rich collection of templates and guides in the Coda Doc Gallery, including resources from many guests on this podcast, including Shreyas, Gokul, and Shishir, the CEO of Coda. Some of the best teams out there, like Pinterest, Spotify, Square, and Uber, use Coda to run effectively and have published their templates for anyone to use. If you're ping-ponging between lots of documents and spreadsheets, make your life better, and start using Coda. You can take advantage of a special limited-time offer just for startups. Head over to coda.io/lenny to sign up and get $1,000 credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A.io/lenny to sign up and get $1,000 in credit on your account.

Lenny (00:02:59):
I'm excited to chat with my friend, John Cutler, from podcast sponsor Amplitude. Hey, John.

John Cutler (00:03:03):
Hey, Lenny. Excited to be here.

Lenny (00:03:05):
John, give us a behind-the-scenes at Amplitude. When most people think of Amplitude, they think of product analytics, but now you're getting into experimentation and even just launched a CDP. What's the thought process there?

John Cutler (00:03:16):
Well, we've always thought of Amplitude as being about supporting the full product loop. Think collect data, inform, vet, ship experiments, and learn. That's the heart of growth to us. So the big aha was seeing how many customers were using Amplitude to analyze experiments, use segments for outreach, and send data to other destinations. Experiment and CDP came out of listening to and observing our customers.

Lenny (00:03:37):
Supporting growth and learning has always been Amplitude's core focus, right?

John Cutler (00:03:41):
Yeah. So Amplitude tries to meet customers where they are. We just launched starter templates and have a great scholarship program for startups. There's never been a more important time for growth.

Lenny (00:03:50):
Absolutely agree. Thanks for joining us, John, and head to amplitude.com to get started.

Lenny (00:03:58):
Fareed, welcome to the podcast.

Fareed Mosavat (00:04:01):
Thanks for having me, Lenny. I'm super excited to be here.

Lenny (00:04:03):
So to set a little context for listeners that aren't super familiar with you, can you give us just a 45-second overview of your career and all the wonderful things that you've done?

Fareed Mosavat (00:04:14):
Great. Hi. I'm Fareed Mosavat. I live in Berkeley, California with my wonderful wife and two children, but I've been a product leader across a variety of different companies over the course of my career. Today, I am the chief development officer at Reforge where I help run all of our content teams, parts of our operations, and our partnerships with wonderful experts like yourself.

Lenny (00:04:33):
Awesome. What about all the other things you've done?

Fareed Mosavat (00:04:35):
So, previous to this, I spent almost four years as the director of product for a team called Lifecycle at Slack that is effectively a growth team. We're responsible for the self-service business at Slack all the way from first sign up, first team creation through to the first invites, activation, expansion, modernization, and even connecting the dots with our SMB sales team to help nurture some of those small self-service teams into larger commitments through our sales team.

Fareed Mosavat (00:05:02):
I came to that through a variety of different growth and product leadership roles at a bunch of different startups on larger companies. I built one of the first growth teams at Instacart for about a year and a half in the middle of their acceleration. I was VP of Product at a company called Runkeeper before that in Boston, health and fitness tracking company. I was a general manager at Zynga. I got there through a startup that I was an engineer at, basically started as an engineer, ended as a head of product over the course of a couple of years, and then got acquired into Zynga, and actually started my career with almost seven years at Pixar Animation Studios working on visual effects, software tools, and other creative tech to try and solve problems for a bunch of wonderful films you've probably seen or your kids have seen.

Lenny (00:05:45):
Please tell us the films that you worked at. I had no idea that you worked at Pixar.

Fareed Mosavat (00:05:48):
I am credited on Finding Nemo, Cars, Wally, and Up.

Lenny (00:05:55):
What? I did not know any of this.

Fareed Mosavat (00:05:57):
Yeah. Yeah. Basically, I started there right out of college. I was super interested in computer graphics. I'd actually been an intern there, was very lucky to be interested in that in the moment where they were really accelerating the growth of the company going from like the whole company is working on one film to like, "Okay. We're trying to release a film every 18 months." So they really scaled up, and I had been studying computer graphics, and then I was an engineer focused on computer graphics and a little bit of research on that in college, was an intern there, and joined, and just got to see a fun growth period at that company, and really, I think in a lot of ways is the root of why I love doing product management because everything I worked on was at the intersections of interesting creative problems, interesting technical problems, and interesting storytelling problems.

Fareed Mosavat (00:06:45):
So, in a lot of ways, it was like... I think if I connect the dots backwards to the Steve Jobsism is the beginning of how I got interested in solving high-level strategic problems across a bunch of different people doing different kinds of work and maybe how I got relatively good at it. It was because even as an engineer, I was sitting in the middle of those pieces, but I got bored, which sounds crazy, and decided to jump into a startup that nobody had ever heard of that had eight employees in 2006, and the rest is history from there.

Lenny (00:07:17):
Yeah. I wasn't planning to talk about Pixar, but I am so curious. One more question there. What's something that you learned from Pixar that has informed the way that you build products or think about product or your career?

Fareed Mosavat (00:07:28):
At the foundation of it is when I first got there, I thought what was important was modeling how things work in the real world. They're making things look right, so to speak. What I learned there is that actually, you're trying to deliver an end experience, and product, and story to your viewers, to your audience. It doesn't actually matter what's real. It matters what you see on the screen. It matters the emotion that it creates, the story that it creates, how it reinforces all of the other pieces. So the technical pieces were just a means to that end. So, of course, we used real physics and real math behind the scenes to do stuff, but if you had to box the numbers to make it look right, that's the right thing to do.

Fareed Mosavat (00:08:15):
So I remember as I was working on early effects, bubbles, sand, so this kind of stuff, I was trying to do things the way it would really work, and then the camel would look at it, and almost the first lesson I learned there was like, "No. What matters is the end result, the end product, the end feeling." I feel like I go back to that a lot as I think about product development not just from an engineering and technical standpoint, but from what's in your strategy doc isn't that important. It's actually just an input into the end experience that you're trying to deliver for customers. When we're thinking about content development in our programs, it's not important that all of the principles fit perfectly together into this MEC framework. It matters that you help people solve actual problems. What's the end goal that you're looking for? I feel like that's the lesson that I just keep going back to for my time there.

Lenny (00:09:06):
It's a great segue to Reforge, which I want to spend a little bit of time on. Folks that listen to this podcast know that I'm a huge fan, and we have a lot of Reforge alumni on this podcast.

Fareed Mosavat (00:09:15):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:09:16):
So a couple questions there. One, you said you're a chief development officer. Is that your title?

Fareed Mosavat (00:09:20):
Yes.

Lenny (00:09:21):
What is it that you do as a chief development officer?

Fareed Mosavat (00:09:23):
It's funny because in a lot of ways, it's not a made-up title, but trying to figure out how a role that I ended up sliding into as I grew my engagement with the company, how do we describe what it is? So I think what's unique about Reforge versus a traditional software startup, or a SaaS company, or all the other things you see is that we're not just a software company. Of course, we have a website. Go to it. You see things, you deliberate, but we also build a lot of stuff and experiences that fit into that. We build content. We build programs today. We're going to build all kinds of other content. We have live cohort experiences that are designed and thoughtful, and we build and try to make, solve certain customer problems.

Fareed Mosavat (00:10:08):
We have a member slack that we try to design to solve certain problems. We have the people like yourself and a lot of the guests that you've had on the podcast like Elena, or Adam Fishman, or Casey who plugged into our system to help us build all of those things because at the end of the day, our job is to help unlock the expertise that's locked in the heads of the greatest operators in the world. So who do we work with? How do we develop that content? How do we make their ideas shine? How do we solve real member problems? How do we help people do work?

Fareed Mosavat (00:10:38):
A lot of that is a product experience that in some ways, like a Pixar movie, there's the technical aspects and the UX aspects, but there's also all of the content, and the partners that we work with, and those pieces. I own all of that piece, like the production, content, the new product experiences, and all of the pieces that fit in there. So we have a team of really talented, amazing people that work on these things, and I lead those teams.

Lenny (00:11:02):
It's interesting how that comes back to your Pixar experience of the combination of intersection of art and technology.

Fareed Mosavat (00:11:09):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:11:09):
That's so interesting. Okay. Never thought about it that way. Yeah.

Fareed Mosavat (00:11:12):
Like we said, it's easier to connect the dots in reverse than moving forward. I have always been not that precious about titles, career roles, et cetera. I've really found myself drawn to, "Is this an interesting problem that I believe I can bring something valuable to the table? Can I help solve this in some meaningful way, and will I learn something great and new from this role?" At every step, I made those decisions. I've gone up and down the title stack from VP down to ICPM, from engineer to product, from product to this new thing and content. In every single one, I think it's a lot about, "What are you bringing to the table to help solve that problem? What are you taking away from the job and learning from it, and how do you turn that into the next step?"

Lenny (00:11:57):
Awesome, and we're going to chat about a lot of those learnings from your experience going through these career journeys, but one last question on Reforge. Just like how big is Reforge at this point? How many cohorts? How many students? How many people work there? What's the operation scale at this point?

Fareed Mosavat (00:12:11):
It's hard to count how many employees because it's growing so fast. I believe we are at just around 150 total employees across the whole company right now.

Lenny (00:12:19):
Wow.

Fareed Mosavat (00:12:20):
That doesn't include our executives and residents, subject matter experts, and the partners we work with. That's full-time employees working on the business. Of course, we have a large product development, product design, engineering, and data teams, but also the teams that I run. We call them strategy leads, content producers, content strategists, content designers, building all of that content as well as our partners team and operations team. So it's a relatively large company at this point. When I first started working with it, it was a scrappy operation of just a handful of folks, but we've grown quite a bit of over the last year.

Fareed Mosavat (00:12:51):
With that, we support, I believe, now 19 total cohort-based programs across product, engineering, marketing, and growth-related topics as well as a bunch of new experiences that we're working on for the coming future here in the next year. We have well over 10,000 active members on the platform, about a dozen executives and residents that work to help us deliver those programs, and hundreds of partners. We call them experts and operators in the space who contribute to our programs in different ways either as guests or as mentors, or helping us develop content behind the scenes.

Lenny (00:13:25):
Awesome, and I taught a couple guest lectures this past cohort. I think my second ever lesson was with you. You were the teacher?

Fareed Mosavat (00:13:32):
Yes. Yeah. We talked about instant buy, I think they're called, but I can't remember the name.

Lenny (00:13:37):
Instant book. Close, close.

Fareed Mosavat (00:13:38):
Instant book, sorry.

Lenny (00:13:38):
Yeah.

Fareed Mosavat (00:13:38):
On the Reforge platform for experimentation and testing program, which was, yeah, actually, also my first program that I helped lead at Reforge, and I think you were my first guest.

Lenny (00:13:47):
Oh my god.

Fareed Mosavat (00:13:47):
So, thanks. Thanks for not making me look bad.

Lenny (00:13:51):
Thank you. So what's cool about your background working at Reforge and all the companies you worked at is that you've seen a lot of PM careers go well and PM careers go not so well. So what I want to spend our time on is talking through just the career development journey for product managers and in particular, the challenges that PMs face trying to become better PMs and just why it's innately tricky to become better as a product manager. It's such a weird job to get better at. So my first question is actually, why is it so hard to become better as a PM? Why is it innately a tricky thing to develop as a PM?

Fareed Mosavat (00:14:28):
One of the trickiest bits about it is that there's no clear, obvious pre-training you can do that gives you a baseline set of understanding that you can use to be a product manager. People come from MBAs, people come from certain kinds of majors in college, et cetera, but it's not engineering where like, "Okay. With a couple of weeks of bootcamp or a couple of years of a computer science education, I have some foundational knowledge that helps me go from zero to one in my first job." Not only does it help me break in because I have a credential that helps me land that job, and we can talk about why landing your first PM job is so hard, but also, there's not a lot of stuff that one-to-one directly correlates to the work you're going do on a day-to-day basis.

Fareed Mosavat (00:15:11):
I think there's an idea that Naval Ravikant talked about on Twitter and in blog posts a long time ago, this concept of specific knowledge that can only be gathered by actually doing the work. A lot of product management, really, is like that. You get better by doing it, and so you start in the same place, if that makes sense. Of course, there are different skills and intellectual capacities, et cetera that help different people be more successful at it, but at the end of the day, you don't know if a PM is going to be great until they start doing that work. So I think that's one of the pieces that's very hard.

Fareed Mosavat (00:15:41):
The second is the thing I just alluded to, which is breaking in and getting your first role. It's just a very difficult situation for a lot of companies, and there are a couple of different paths to it, but none of them are straightforward. There's no clear linear path, except for maybe being a Stanford or Harvard grad, top-tier school grad, NCS with an internship, goes to Google to do an APM program. There are a couple of these things that are surefire, but I don't think they guarantee success, and they are actually very limited in terms of the number of people that they let into the business.

Fareed Mosavat (00:16:13):
So I think this is what makes it so hard is that there's not any upfront training you can really do to prepare yourself or even knock down the door to break in. But then, also, it's not clear there's a lot of training within a company that would help you be successful generally on the job of product management. You can learn how to be a good PM at Google, you can learn to be a good PM at Facebook, but it is up to each individual PM to figure out how to generalize what they're doing to move from different kinds of product across different kinds of product work as they get more senior to solve bigger problems, et cetera.

Fareed Mosavat (00:16:51):
So what we tried to do at Reforge is we are focused on helping people accelerate that learning loop. It's not, "Hey, if you take this class, now you're qualified to be a PM." It's not really like that. I don't know if that's possible. I hope it will be someday, but it is very difficult. I think it's more, "Hey, we want to help you when you encounter certain kinds of problems, not have to solve them from first principles, but following the footsteps of the people who have done great work in the past, generalize those lessons." But at the end of the day, you still have to get down and do the work.

Fareed Mosavat (00:17:25):
You can't do homework, you can't do exercises, you can't do fake stuff. You have to work on real products at real companies with real customers, with real data to get better at product management. So any kind of training, mentorship, reading, et cetera that you do is just a layer on top of that. The real acceleration happens from doing it and getting more reps. There are ways that I think great PMs use to go faster on this loop, but you still have to do the work. At the core is you have to actually execute and deliver great products, and you have to do it over, and over, and over again.

Lenny (00:18:03):
Yes. Let's absolutely dig into that. Let me put out a couple mental models that I'm thinking as you're talking.

Fareed Mosavat (00:18:07):
Sure.

Lenny (00:18:08):
One is just if you think about a pie chart of a great PM's career and/or investments they make along their career journey, how do you break up that pie chart? Like some percentage is doing the work, some percentage is courses, maybe some percentage is books. So just putting that out there in case that's useful to think about, and then the other is thinking about the trajectory of a PM on a line chart, and what are these inflection points that you've seen most impact the career trajectory of a PM?

Fareed Mosavat (00:18:34):
So let's start at the first one, the pie chart idea. What percent is spent on different things? Unsurprisingly because Reforge is all about growth loops, I think of this in terms of a loop actually, which is like, "What is that learning or career acceleration, or ability acceleration loop? At the core, again, at the top of the loop is execution. You have to have a real problem. You're working on with real customers that you want to solve in some way. So, you're executing. You're delivering. You're learning at the beginning. It's all about execution. So we'll start with the pie chart at the beginning. It's almost all execution.

Fareed Mosavat (00:19:06):
What are the problems you give a junior or brand new PM? Known problem, known solution. "Please work with engineering and design to deliver that thing on time, and then tell us what happened." So it's like a very tightly constrained problem. As you level up, then some of these things become more unknowns. So there's execution, but I think the next step that great product managers do is they think about how to generalize that execution a little bit. So it's not just, "Okay. Now, I know what the best settings page for Slack is." It's, "What generalizations did you make? What are the things that you can take that are applicable to other stuff?"

Fareed Mosavat (00:19:49):
Some of that is execution-oriented, how to best work with engineers, how to iterate on designs, what customers do and don't do, rules of thumb, those kinds of things. I think that's where reading courses, et cetera can help because sometimes by bringing other... or one-on-one conversations with experts, et cetera. There are a whole bunch of different ways, but is that the generalization step? "Hey, I did this thing. Oh, other people have done something similar. How do I connect the dots on that? How do I make this experience bigger than what I've just done and lead me to help solve other problems?"

Lenny (00:20:23):
These are things you're doing in your head, basically. You're just developing frameworks, mental models, things that you're just taking with you to the next project in your mind.

Fareed Mosavat (00:20:31):
Exactly. So, to use an example, there was a time at Instacart where we were working on onboarding, brand new onboarding and activation flow for customers. We tried a lot of different stuff. We tried the slimmest, fastest, lowest friction, least number of steps path in, and then we had this hypothesis about helping people get set up. So we took the opposite approach, which was a really long onboarding with a bunch of different steps and wanted to see, "Was that more effective or less effective?"

Fareed Mosavat (00:20:59):
The generalization is, "Oh, for products that had a high bar to activation, sometimes more set up and higher friction, good friction could actually help those customers be successful. There are other kinds of products that are high-intent where they know what they need to do to have simple actions where lowering friction might be the right thing." So, that's a generalization. It's a generalization of, "Oh, I learned a thing." It's a hypothesis about how that might generalize other kinds of products or other kinds of problems that you approach. I think some of that can come from seeing it from the outside, listening to a podcast, hearing you say it, taking a course, et cetera. But at the end of the day, you have to experience it to see how it applies to the world.

Fareed Mosavat (00:21:42):
Then, the next bit is communication, and I think this is a bit that a lot of product managers, obviously, and any job miss, but you can't just do the work. You have to actually communicate the work. You have to talk about what you're doing, what you've generalized, what you've learned so that you can hit the next step, which is scale your opportunities. Go from smaller known problem, known solution to maybe known problem, unknown solution type of work, which is the next step.

Fareed Mosavat (00:22:08):
Then, eventually, to where you want to be as a senior, great, high-level individual contributor PM to the not quite known problem, maybe a goal with a set of problems and unknown solutions, unknown problems, unknown solutions, where you're actually identifying customer problems and moving towards on that. So scaling up your opportunity, and then executing again. I think of this as a loop of learning, and so of course, the percentages change over time as you move more senior in your career, but also, depending on where you're at in the step that the percentages change.

Lenny (00:22:40):
Got it. So, just to recap, execute, just do the work, just ship.

Fareed Mosavat (00:22:44):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:22:44):
Generalize learnings from shipping to build up your gut feeling of what will work and not work.

Fareed Mosavat (00:22:49):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:22:50):
Learn to communicate things you're doing, and then scale the things that you're executing based on this gut feeling you're building, and communicate that out, and just continue. Do you think scaling take on more scope or have more impact? Is that how you think about scaling, that last piece?

Fareed Mosavat (00:23:06):
Yeah. I think it's one moving from knowns to unknowns.

Lenny (00:23:08):
Great.

Fareed Mosavat (00:23:09):
So like you're being given a hairier, harder to untangle types of problems with more unknowns and more autonomy. I think the second is, yeah, of course, with... although I think for the beginning of your career, you tend to go deeper. So it's like, "Okay. I'm going to work on growth, let's say, or core product, or zero-to-one products, or technical scaling, whatever it is. I'm going to go deeper on that," and then over time, that turns into width, but this is why the generalization step is important.

Fareed Mosavat (00:23:39):
If you want to be a product leader, you cannot be seen solely as a specialist in that certain kind of product work, and so the generalization step is really important. If you want to move from growth to core product, you need to show that you're not just running experiments and driving numbers up. You need to show and communicate that you're learning deeper lessons about how customer psychology works, and what products people resonate with, and how to think about the business more holistically, and then communication. No one knows what you're thinking if you don't tell them. So if you don't communicate, you don't have control over those scaled opportunities. Usually, your manager, or the organization, or the company does. Maybe by switching jobs, you have some control, but you need to earn that right. You need to communicate. That's why I think there's pieces of the loop you can control and pieces that are externalized.

Lenny (00:24:25):
I'm curious, in your own career, what the biggest inflections of growth have been either in terms of learning, or impact, or just opportunity?

Fareed Mosavat (00:24:33):
The first big one was when I switched from being an engineer to being a product... I didn't even know it was product management, but a product leader of some kind. I think there are two things that happen. One is you got to be doing this stuff, but often, somebody needs to see it. The scale opportunity piece of the step often requires someone from outside to notice that you're doing something really well and trust you with a bigger opportunity. I think of this as sponsorship, not mentorship. I don't necessarily find that in my career. I've had a lot of managers where I'm like, "Wow, their day-to-day help was super awesome at helping me be a better leader."

Fareed Mosavat (00:25:10):
I hope that I've been that for some people, but I don't have a ton of examples of that in my career. But what I do have is a couple examples of people who deeply trusted me to solve big problems, and I don't know. I'm lucky to have had that or otherwise, but one was a CEO of that startup who's now a venture capitalist. His name is Nabeel Hyatt. I was like, "Hey, you seem to understand the data better than anybody here. You're solving these problems. Help us figure out what we're going to do next," which now we call product management.

Lenny (00:25:36):
But he was at, by the way?

Fareed Mosavat (00:25:38):
it was called Conduit Labs.

Lenny (00:25:39):
Okay. Yeah.

Fareed Mosavat (00:25:39):
It's a game company. Then, eventually, I was the director of product for our Boston studio. The next was at Slack. I was an ICPM working on activation and growth on a team of three or four other PMs, and there were a couple of moments where by communicating my work and talking through how I was solving problems, people noticed that I knew what I was doing and gave me bigger and bigger opportunities. One of those was Merci Grace, who I think has been on your pod and was a wonderful sponsor for me. Then, again, when Merci left, April Underwood, who's the CPO, said, "It seems like you have a handle on this. I'd like you to take on a bigger range of problems across all of this growth and not just the modernization piece that I've been working on before." So I think in each of those steps it's about creating trust and knowing that you have a sponsor there, someone who's going to go to bat for you.

Lenny (00:26:25):
I really love this point of sponsorship. We haven't talked a lot about this on the podcast. There's a lot of talk of finding a coach or having a manager that teaches you how to do the job, but this idea of just getting to a place where someone gives you an opportunity to shine, and that's been really big in my career just like certain managers just, "Here, Lenny. You take this, and let's see what you can do."

Fareed Mosavat (00:26:44):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:26:45):
Is there anything else you can recommend to folks to create opportunities for sponsorship? You talked about communication, executing well. Is that just the core of it, like doing a great job and communicating the great job you're doing?

Fareed Mosavat (00:26:57):
This idea that it's what you do and that's multiplied by your ability to show that work and communicate it, and that's the impact that you can have, but you have to have not just impact on the customers, but also on the organization. I think it is impact on the organization, changing the way people think about problems, helping generalize what works and what doesn't work, bringing learnings to the table.

Fareed Mosavat (00:27:18):
For me, I've worked a lot on growth, and I've treated a huge part of my job as not just moving the numbers, but also teaching the organization how our growth model works, how the pieces fit together, what our customers care about, what's working, what's not working, and that creates a lot of, A, leverage in other parts of the organization because they can do better work by having more information, but also, B, trust. Trust from leadership, trust from your peers, and otherwise.

Fareed Mosavat (00:27:44):
So, now, how do you get to that? Some of it is just luck. Someone has got to believe in you. You can create your luck by being good at communicating and solving hard problems. I think the other piece is knowing when you go into an organization, "Is this a role that's important to the company? Is it on the list?" I think it is easier to find sponsors, communicate, and create leverage if the thing you're working on is in the top four or five most important things the company is working on. I find myself drawn to those kinds of problems, and I think that's one way because then, all of a sudden, CEOs notice what you're working on, heads of product notice what you're working on, and your peers notice what you're working on.

Fareed Mosavat (00:28:22):
The other bit is curiosity. I think to be in the seat where people want to sponsor you, I think you have to show a handle on not just what you're doing, but how that relates to all of the things around you. So I call this going two stack levels up, two stack levels down in terms of your curiosity and what you understand, and also, knowing what's to the left and what's to the right. So let's use the example of if I'm working on activation on growth, let's say, or monetization. It doesn't matter. One of those two pieces. When I say two stack levels down, I like to understand how we build customers, how it works in Stripe, what are our dunning policies, what are the technical things that work and don't work in the pieces maybe down to the database. Right?

Fareed Mosavat (00:29:08):
It's like technical curiosity, those kinds of things, but also mental models for what's above you. How do we grow? How does modernization fit into that? What are the trade-offs versus free growth versus paid growth? How important is this to the company? How does it fit into our long-term strategy? Those kinds of things. So it's like the strategic things above you. I like two stack levels because it's like you should understand your boss's priorities and your boss's boss's priorities. Eventually, that means you have to know what the board is thinking, right? Then, left and right is, "What are the core product teams working on that I could help advise on in terms of modernization or they could advise me on what they're thinking and what might be coming next? How do we fit together with the enterprise part of the business even though I'm working on self-serve? How do I think about sales? Do they have input, like interesting customer conversations or input?

Fareed Mosavat (00:29:58):
It's this curiosity like walking around, getting to know what people are doing, and being seen as an expert. Are you the desk people go to when they have questions? Are you a person that people ask the opinion when you're trying to figure out how the dots connect? I have found for me, maybe this is just because this is a strength of mine, that connecting the dots of how the whole company works and how all the pieces fit together has been one of the ways that I've driven that sponsorship. I think for each individual, you have to figure out what your superpower is and where you can be actually top 10%, and then lean into opportunities and also problems that help you show that and shine it that way.

Lenny (00:30:34):
That is such cool advice. I think what's cool about that is I imagine you just go to your manager and even just ask, "Hey, I'd love to understand just what are your highest priorities, and then what are your manager's?" Just ask these questions. Just that alone I think communicates a lot about how much you care and your interest there, and that creates trust, even if you don't do a ton with it, and knowing what your manager cares about is just going to help in so many other ways just like, "Okay. This matters to them. I'm going to make sure to do a good job there."

Fareed Mosavat (00:31:00):
Absolutely.

Lenny (00:31:01):
So that is a really cool framework.

Fareed Mosavat (00:31:02):
Not only do a good job there, but I'm going to figure out how to communicate what I'm doing to be only the parts that are important and matter to them. I'm going to know that when I hit a certain decision that needs to be made, whether I need their input or not. There are all these different pieces like understanding when to be heads-down, when to be heads-up, when to communicate, when not to, but I think understanding how all the pieces fit together, you really just try, and I always think of it as trying to build a mental model of how the company works, and what's important to it, and what's the equation, so to speak, or what are all the boxes, and then figure out like, "How is my work creating leverage in that?" I find that when you are thinking at that level, people tend to trust you.

Lenny (00:31:44):
The core of trust is people. Your manager and their leaders need to feel like you will do a good job and a bigger responsibility, and what gives them trust? Oh, they do a good job, or they're curious, and excited, and understand all these things that they need to understand. So it all makes sense, and I'm always weary of asking PMs to do more work. It's such a busy, long hours job already, and what's cool about these things you're talking about is it's not necessarily a lot more work. It's just a little bit of research and a little bit of digging and thinking.

Fareed Mosavat (00:32:12):
Yeah. I think the hard part of this is I have not figured out how to do this well in a remote environment without throwing a lot of one-on-ones on people's calendars because sometimes you figured this out just by hearing conversations, hang out at lunch, and asking questions, and those kinds of things, but it's certainly not impossible. You just have to work out a little more,

Lenny (00:32:31):
Just more Zooms.

Fareed Mosavat (00:32:32):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:32:33):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell it to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table, but getting a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time-consuming, tedious, and expensive.

Lenny (00:33:20):
Enter, Vanta. Over 3,000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

Lenny (00:33:50):
So I know something you spend a lot of time thinking about is the transition from an ICPM to a manager, and you have this really epic post that I think you call the Product Leader Canyon that you think of this as a canyon that a lot of PMs don't cross. So I want to spend a little bit of time here. Can you maybe just talk about what this canyon is, and why it exists?

Fareed Mosavat (00:34:08):
Yeah. We talked a little bit about the first of very hard part in product management career development, which is like, "How do I land my first job?" Not a pro at that. We can talk about that more, but then this path from IC to more senior IC working on bigger problems that have more business impact, et cetera, it's a relatively straightforward path. We just talked about some of the ways that you do that. You get a deeper understanding across a wider range of business problems. You solve more unknowns versus being handed problems to solve, et cetera, and you do that by being good at your job. You do that by being good at your job basically as a solo product manager on an island.

Fareed Mosavat (00:34:48):
We talked about communication and those kinds of things, but at the end of the day, like we described, most of the work is execution. Most of the work is partnering with your engineering manager, partnering with your designer and your team to build stuff and deliver stuff. You've gotten there by being really good at that. Right? You've gotten there by getting in the weeds, getting in the details, sweating what matters, working hard at it. So someone says, "We'd love for you to lead this team." Great. It's really easy to look at that and say, "Okay. Now, instead of owning free to paid conversion, I own growth overall."

Fareed Mosavat (00:35:28):
The first thing you do is start to figure out, "What are the most interesting and valuable projects that I can work on? As an IC, I can only have one person on my team to go dive in and work on those things to make a lot of leverage." This can create a little bit of a spiral of failure because it's the hard job. The IC part of the job is really hard. So, now, I gave you more work across more things, and you're already working 56 hours a week. Now, you got to keep track of more projects across more teams and more people, and maybe you kept the two or three most critical ones to yourself.

Fareed Mosavat (00:36:04):
So that's one angle is learning about, yes, it's probably the right thing in the near term for you to focus, and work on this, and be really directive about what to do, and get in every single detail, and make sure you deliver the best product. But long run, you've taken a learning opportunity away from someone else, and you've taken the opportunity for you to be a leveraged person that is more valuable than just their time away as well. So I think that's one piece that drives a lot of failures, just this like, "Okay. Now, I have more problems to work on. I'm going to go deeper on it," and handing the people on your team the least interesting, least leveraged, least fun stuff to do, thinking that's how you get to like, "Oh, now, I get to work on the fun projects, and the interesting and high-leverage ones, and I'll leave all the other ones to other people."

Lenny (00:36:51):
I think you call this the manager death spiral. Is that the same?

Fareed Mosavat (00:36:55):
Yeah. Yeah, manager death spiral.

Lenny (00:36:56):
Yeah.

Fareed Mosavat (00:36:56):
This is not unique to product management. This happens in almost every leadership role. You're in a position. You have broader responsibility. You got there by being the best IC on the team probably, so your instincts are to, "I see a bunch of important stuff," and do management stuff too. Right?

Lenny (00:37:15):
People may be like, "Oh, shit. How do I avoid this death spiral?" Do you have any advice? Maybe you'll get there, but just how do you avoid this death spiral of keeping all the good stuff and just not scaling yourself?

Fareed Mosavat (00:37:24):
I think the first is, honestly, just you have to start trusting other people, which is not common to where you've been till today, but you have to start trusting. You have to shift from doer to editor is the way I think about it. You have to shift from, "My job is to do the work," to, "My job is to make the work better. My job is to plus the work, to review the work, to help other people solve problem." Sometimes that's by being directive. Right?

Fareed Mosavat (00:37:51):
Sometimes that's by letting them run because you're like, "Lenny, you're great. Please go solve this problem. Call me when you have a problem." If you have people that are in that upper quadrant of like they understand the problem, they have the level of experience to solve it, it's maybe not 100% important. Maybe it is. That kind of thing. Then, there's the coach in the middle, which is like, "How do I help make that work better?" They have to start figuring out like, "Where is each person on your team in their expertise, and what level of input is the highest leverage for me?"

Fareed Mosavat (00:38:24):
I actually think of it as start thinking in terms of being lazy, "What's the least amount of work I could do to make this thing as good as possible?" versus, "How do I do as much work as possible to make sure it's great?" So it's like looking in terms of ROI. The other is just hiring, bringing on great people you trust, making sure you're staffed appropriately, and there's just a second bit. I think one of the bigger mistakes that new ICs make on teams, that they still treat problems the same way they did as ICs, which normally, when you run a pod, basically, your job is, "How do I deliver the most value with the resources I have?"

Fareed Mosavat (00:38:57):
When you're a leader, it's now your job to propose, "What are the resources we need to have the most impact on this problem?" I think I personally have messed this up a bunch of times where at the end of the core, I'll be like, "Yeah, but we only had four engineers, and this is what we could do." I'm like, "That wasn't what we asked you to do. We asked you to solve this problem. So adding four more people was what you needed or you needed the marketing team to do X, Y, and Z." You need to go out and do that work now. It is not just your job to get what you can get done with the resources in front of you. It's your job to marshal resources both inside your org and across your organization. I think that's another big area that's related to the trust bit because, again, it's this habit of, "Oh, I got here by doing everything myself." You have to start realizing that your job is to convince other people to do work too.

Lenny (00:39:49):
Awesome. So, going back to the canyon. So the first piece was essentially over-focusing on just being too good at the thing you're already doing versus going broader, is that right?

Fareed Mosavat (00:39:59):
Mm-hmm. Yeah. So it's like, "Hey, how do I maximize my output? I can do this myself faster than I can explain it to someone else, so I'll just do it," and then finding that you're blocking your team because you're in the middle of every single decision, finding that you're totally overworked, and finding that people aren't learning or growing because those opportunities have been taken from them. So what do you do to break that? You have to just slowly start to give up, trust, do that. So I think that's the one bit is that death spiral of what's getting stuff done.

Lenny (00:40:31):
No, no. You can curse all you want. That's all good.

Fareed Mosavat (00:40:33):
Okay. Great. Oh, you've just... Well, be careful with "all you want."

Lenny (00:40:36):
Nobody has cursed yet on this podcast, and it's all allowed.

Fareed Mosavat (00:40:40):
Okay.

Lenny (00:40:41):
It's the internet. I don't know.

Fareed Mosavat (00:40:41):
We'll solve that.

Lenny (00:40:42):
Okay.

Fareed Mosavat (00:40:43):
Don't worry. I think the other is what I call the four types of product work, and I think this is not always right at the manager stage. But for every great product leader, you go from being an expert in some type of product work, and I'll describe what those are, to now owning a portfolio of work across a bunch of different dimensions. So the way I think about product work, and Casey Winters and I worked on this framework together, a lot of it comes from him. So I don't want to oversay it, but it's all part of our product strategy program at Reforge is first, feature work, adding new features, product experiences, et cetera into a product in order to drive engagement with your existing customer base and solve a wider range of problems.

Fareed Mosavat (00:41:24):
The second is growth work. "How do I help my customers or a broader range of customers connect with the experiences we already have, and drive acceleration and either top-line growth, or modernization, or whatever the most important metrics are. I think you've had many guests on to talk about growth type work. The third is related to growth, but I think is slightly different, which is what we call product market fit expansion. So it's not exactly feature work, which is like, "Hey, now that I use your product more, I have this thing I need in order to keep using it because I'm a power seller," those kinds of things. But instead, we want to attract a whole new sub-segments of markets to the product by adding something.

Fareed Mosavat (00:42:05):
There are two forms of product market fit expansion. There's either taking the same product and finding a new audience. Things like internationalization or vertical like, "I'm going to sell the same product to a different vertical because we're a verticalized product." The other is selling a different product to the same audience. This is what bundling strategies basically look like. Right? So adding new marketing tools to a marketing suite, et cetera that attract a different kind of customer and that either drive upsell or drive new audiences to come to that.

Fareed Mosavat (00:42:34):
So that's the third kind of product work, and then there's the fourth that is always forgotten by a lot of PMs which is scaling work. So what is the stuff we're doing that is because we are growing, there's new product work we need to do? Most people think of this as technical scaling, but I actually put things like trust, and safety, and other kinds of what we call user scaling problems in this as well. There are a lot of problems that come up at Airbnb just because instead of having 10 hosts, you have 10,000 hosts. Right? There are a lot of problems at Twitter and Facebook that are well puzzle-sized that are a result of their scale, and I think that's a chunk of work that I put in the same category as technical scaling, which is like, "How do we make sure the product continues to work for the people who are using it?"

Fareed Mosavat (00:43:15):
So the challenge of the four kinds of product work. "Okay. Great. We have a framework. How is that useful, Fareed?" It's not that useful. It is to know what kind you're doing, but I think as you go up the stack of product leadership, you are going from being probably an expert in one of these, so for me, growth, to needing to think about all these other ones, and you've probably never done them before. Right? Maybe you've done two, but how do you lead across a bunch of different things, and how do you make sure not to be over-focused on the one that you care the most about?

Fareed Mosavat (00:43:46):
We've all seen this. Right? It's like growth leader takes over, and everything is a growth problem. Everything is an experiment. Everything should be measured. That's not necessarily true for some of these other kinds of work, and so how do you start to lead, and grow, and build a portfolio across those? I think that's where some of the stuff we talked about before, deep curiosity, looking across, asking a lot of questions, getting to a foundational understanding of what's important there, et cetera is really important.

Lenny (00:44:14):
Got it. So part of this is learning new types of product work. So we're talking about trying to move from IC to manager and the things that get in the way, and so is the advice there just start to learn and understand... Maybe, say, you're doing feature work. You're just building a dashboard for your users. Is your advice there like start thinking about how growth works and understand the growth strategy of the company so that people give you this opportunity of, "Okay. Let's put Fareed on maybe a couple other things here because he already understands a little bit more about growth?"

Fareed Mosavat (00:44:45):
Yeah. I think there's a framework thing, and then there's like, "What practical advice?" So from a framework perspective, I think it's important to ask the question, "For each of the things that I am responsible for, what category does this fall into? What's important about it? What are the right ways to think about building that, given that it is different than what I've built before?" So, some of this, you can do within an org. If you're working on core product stuff, you probably have an adoption problem on one of your products, and there's growth work associated with driving usage of that thing.

Fareed Mosavat (00:45:18):
So I think there's a piece at which even within a certain sub-segment that this can be valuable. You could be working on enterprise, which looks a lot like a lot of scaling work, right, and a lot of feature work, "Get me the right administrative dashboards and these kinds of things," but also, maybe you have a problem that's a growth problem. "How do I drive adoption? How do I actually drive usage? How do I make sure that our new enterprise customers are activated and retained?"

Fareed Mosavat (00:45:43):
So I think at scale, any product leadership work has some pieces of these different kinds, and I think building a mental model for, "What are the other things we need to do? What's the right portfolio allocation across these different types of product work, and do I have enough of a baseline understanding of the different ways to evaluate and think about those and what the goals are in order to drive leadership across work I might not be able to do myself very well?" I am not a good technical PM despite having an engineering background. It's been too long, but I hope that I can lead technical scaling, technical debt restructure on my team or at least understand whether it's important to do or not.

Lenny (00:46:20):
So if you think about this concept of getting through this canyon broadly, it boils down to more scope. Maybe that's the way to think about it. It's like more scope of product work that you work on, being better at different types of work, scaling yourself so that other people can do work on your behalf or within your umbrella, and the point you made about not being satisfied with the resources you have and in helping people understand, "Here's what we could do if we had this many resources," and making the case for that feels like that's the overview. Is that how you think about it?

Fareed Mosavat (00:46:49):
Yeah. I think that's exactly right, and the last one is really important because now, you have moved to owning the impact. As a leader, you now own the business outcome, the impact, the delivery, not some sub-problem or known answer. You have to define the solutions. You have to talk about how many people you need to do them, and you need to figure out what do you need from the rest of the organization to do that. So, yeah. I think those are the three big buckets of things that I see trip people up.

Lenny (00:47:14):
Awesome, and just add plus one to that last point. Just like a lot of PMs end up being victims of the resources they get and like, "Oh, how could I have possibly had this impact with the resources you gave me?" versus, "How do I avoid that and empower myself to help people understand, 'Here's what I need to do this thing that you want me to do. If you think this is important, here's what we need,' and put it on other people's plate?" It doesn't mean you'll get it, but it's important to put that up front.

Fareed Mosavat (00:47:38):
Yeah, and that goes from a "would be nice" and makes you a better... more junior or even senior PM makes you a more effective one. It's extra credit. At the leadership level, it's baseline. The baseline is, "Okay. I believe this is the outcome we need to get to by this time, and this is what it's going to take. Here are the trade-offs. Here's what I need. Here's what I can get you if I can't do that." The reason I drum this one home is I feel like this is the mistake I have made now multiple times in my career, and I can't... At this point, I'm embarrassed to have seen it happen over and over again because you just get caught up in like, "Okay. Here's the team I have. I've got to build a roadmap. I've got to make sure everybody's got work to do," and you say focused on feeding that beast, and you forget to ask, "Is this even the right group to solve this?" Maybe you need a smaller team even, maybe you need a bigger team, or maybe you need different people. I think often, you find yourself victim of the circumstances instead of owning the situation.

Lenny (00:48:39):
I love that. When did you realize this was something you should be doing?

Fareed Mosavat (00:48:42):
I've learned different versions of this lesson now multiple times. I learned it at Instacart. I had a very small team, and we've got a lot done. But honestly, I think I failed to make the case that we should grow it faster and only... It was only when someone was like, "We should add more people." I was like, "Great. Yeah. Let's do that." I don't think I was hurt by that, but I think it was a, "Oh, you have permission. You should have asked," kind of thing. I think at Slack, the lesson I learned was about cross-functional. I think we did a good job of making the case for why we needed new teams or add more things to drive more impact, but I still took a very product approach to solving activation and monetization expansion type problems.

Fareed Mosavat (00:49:25):
What I think is I look at what could have moved the needle more and what it could have made me a more successful leader at that company. It would've been partnering more closely with marketing, for instance, to figure out how we could be working on things together, helping drive their roadmap, and vice versa. Same with sales. Same with the data org. Same with finance. Those kinds of things where I don't think I was driving enough of the high-level outcome I owned, which is driving growth in the self-service business across the other parts of the company that needed to do that. I was a product leader, so I did product work, and I... Lesson learned.

Lenny (00:50:05):
Yeah. Thanks for sharing that. So we've been talking a lot about the regular path, and getting better and accelerating your path as a product leader, and staying on this track. There's also this alternative track that I know you're passionate about, and Reforge just become a beacon, it feels like, of folks that are moving away from working at one company to working at many companies and scaling their impact. I'm curious to hear your thoughts on what you've seen there. There's this large trend of just senior people becoming advisors, writing things, newsletters, for example. I'm curious what you think is happening there and how you think about that.

Fareed Mosavat (00:50:41):
It's interesting. The whys are hard to pin down, but it's definitely happening. I think some of it is maybe COVID-induced, some of it is remote work driving these trends, and some of it is just like there are a lot more leaders who are a lot more in demand. So, just to recap, a trend that I think we are seeing and that has been really interesting is a trend of senior leaders, people with meaningful operating experience, first, diversifying their impact maybe while they're still at a full-time role. Someone like yourself, Lenny, maybe was full-time at Airbnb or a similar company and said, "Hey, I'd like to do some advising, some angel investing, some speaking. Maybe I'll start writing a newsletter on the side," and then moving to this new category that I don't feel like really existed. Maybe it did in certain pockets of executive leadership around tech and startups, but really seeing it in product management of a shift towards, "The best use of my time and my career is to work across a portfolio of problems that a variety of different companies."

Fareed Mosavat (00:51:47):
So we are seeing a larger percentage of our executive network. It's still small, but working on things like newsletters, podcasts, those and the like at the edge of the content creator side, but also, full-time advisors, fractional heads of growth, fractional heads of product one day a week, et cetera. Long-term advisory relationships, running workshops. These kinds of things that are more like a la carte. I think they love it because of the flexibility that it creates for them. They love it because of the high upside and non-linearity of possibility of results now instead of having equity in one company for four years of 100% of my time. It's a portfolio approach to not just the time and energy, but also the upside and opportunities that are there as well as the fact that they're just so in demand.

Fareed Mosavat (00:52:41):
For senior leaders who have been in meaningful seats at well-known companies, you're getting hit up by recruiters all day long, and the decision, "What do I want to spend the next four or five, six years of my life on if it's just one thing?" is a very difficult one. So what we're finding is people seeing, "Hey, you don't need me full-time. What you need is me here a day a week to help your up and coming leaders be awesome." We're just seeing more and more of that in the industry, and it's been a really interesting trend to observe. Of our executives and residents, I would say most now are exploring this kind of advisory, fractional, or otherwise portfolio-based approach to their futures. Whereas most of them came from full-time roles beforehand.

Lenny (00:53:24):
Yeah. A program at Reforge is designed for that. The idea there is, "You don't know what you're going to do next? Come teach a class at Reforge to help some folks out, and then use that as the time to explore what you're going to do next." Right?

Fareed Mosavat (00:53:35):
Yeah. Yeah, it is, and the hypothesis... I was one of the first EIR, so I started as an EIR at the company, and then ended up joining full-time as an executive. The hypothesis was, "Hey, let's give people six months to a year so that they don't just hop from one really high-stress, really difficult job into the next one. We also want great operators teaching and meeting our programs. How do we build a win-win situation?" So what we did was we created the Executive in Residence program as a way to help top operators have a transition point, but I think the hypothesis was that most of them would take on the next VP product role, or CPO role, or CMO type role, and what we're finding is that more and more of them are using that space and time.

Fareed Mosavat (00:54:17):
They are building up their understanding of where they're experts and what their real TEDx value is, and then finding ways to do that across a variety of different companies and organizations versus just the single one, one, because they want to try before they buy, so to speak, in terms of of like even if you do end up somewhere full-time, it's nice to be able to really work with them and get to know them because at the executive level in particular, it's a really high level of commitment, and you have a lot of opportunities, so you want to be really careful about it. But also, two, because it may not be the best use of your energy. When you have a lot of frameworks and you have a lot of broad understanding, you have a lot of examples, your value to the ecosystem is often by helping lots of companies be successful, not just one. I suspect that's how you feel about what you're doing as well.

Lenny (00:55:07):
Yeah. When I started down this path of experimenting with a newsletter back in the day, I called it Project Avoid Getting a Real Job, and what I was trying to do is figure out, "Can I make a living doing this thing even though I don't know if there's any way to make money writing a thing?" My wife is always like, "There's no money in writing. What are you doing? I thought you wanted to start a company, that you wanted to do some advising."

Fareed Mosavat (00:55:28):
Yeah. Well, let me talk about why I think the generalization there's no money in writing is true, but I think it's true because it's... In general, maybe not, but what's happening, I think, is people are figuring out, "What is my specific knowledge," just to tie the knots back to the thing we started at the beginning, "that because I've taken so many reps at this is actually not easily replaceable in a focused area?" So modernization or building zero-to-one paid channels as a marketer, or whatever it is. Just narrow enough that I know I'm one of the five best in the world at or I can make the case that I'm one of the five best in the world at it. You as a company probably can't hire that person because you're too early, don't have enough money, don't have enough clout, et cetera, and that I have generalized enough in my mind that I can actually be really effective in a small amount of time.

Fareed Mosavat (00:56:25):
So what works for you, I don't know a lot about the mechanics of your newsletter, but it's not just writing. You're writing about a very specific set of topics that you have unique experience in that has harnessed a very focused community, and I think we're seeing this across a bunch of different things that there's a lot of sub-expertise. No one can be an expert at company. Some people claim to be, but when you get down to it, I feel like an expert on bottoms-up SaaS activation strategy is like, "I can speak pretty confidently about that. Somebody has a problem in that space, I can usually at an hour accelerate their learning pretty dramatically." I think as we're finding what these things are and people are getting smarter about what they're looking for, I think it opened up this space where you can be the best in the world at a relatively narrow topic and make a real meaningful living out of it.

Lenny (00:57:19):
There's two thoughts I want to go into here, and then I think we should probably wrap up, but one is I do worry there's like... everyone that gets to a certain point, it just exits the career track, and who's left to build things? I worry that just everyone is trying to become an influencer/creator person. So what I wanted to chat about briefly is just downsides of this path in life.

Fareed Mosavat (00:57:41):
Sure.

Lenny (00:57:41):
The other pieces is for folks listening that want to pursue this direction, what could they do to set themselves up? So the first piece is just like, what are the downsides? I'll share a few already. So in this life that I lead now, I get no health insurance benefits. I get no time off. I get no 401(k) matching. None of that. I have to basically pay an absurd amount of money for health insurance and find ways to take time off, invent PTO policies for myself, and all these sorts of things. I've gotten used to it, but it is weird. My wife is also an independent self-employed person, so we both don't have... If we have a child, we have no mat leave, pat leave. We just have to figure that out. I don't know how I would do that. So that comes to mind for me. What else have you seen as the downside of this path?

Fareed Mosavat (00:58:25):
Yeah, the second is it's unclear what the longevity is. How far can you be removed from your full-time experience and still be valuable? This is why I actually think this is a better path than what used to happen, which is all the great operators turned into VCs, venture capitalists. Right? In there, you're pretty disconnected from the ops. I think this advisory type path, I'll leave the creator piece alone because I'm not as familiar with it. But in the advisor path, you are still maybe spending a day a week with these companies. You are still doing. You are helping grow the next generation. I don't like to say generation, but next crop of up and coming leaders. So the question mark for me is longevity. Is it possible to build more and more amazing companies if more and more amazing operators are leaving the full-time workforce?

Fareed Mosavat (00:59:20):
I don't know, but I hope that it's better than what it's been because actually, they're building and doing, et cetera. So I think that's the other question mark and downside, and I think we think about this as part of our ecosystem. I think as long as people are doing, and generalizing, and executing, as I talked about it at the beginning, I think they can still be valuable in a meaningful way and maybe provide access to that kind of knowledge for a broader range of companies. The other is just like if everybody does it, then maybe it's not so unique anymore. So I think there's a question there as well.

Lenny (00:59:55):
The other piece is like you're constantly having to do sales and BD as an advisor like, "Who's the next company?" You're always wondering if there will be more, if they stopped. It's a real part of it.

Fareed Mosavat (01:00:03):
That's why it has not been attractive to me personally, I will say. I like being focused on a singular problem for some amount of time. I do a lot of portfolio-type stuff outside. I advise casually. I do some coaching. Not coaching exactly, but mentorship for a couple of different up and coming product leaders. I do some angel investing, those kinds of things. I like to see what's happening around me, but I do like having an anchor. That's like my main thing, and I don't like selling. It turns out I don't, and so you have to like that, I think, to do some of this stuff. But I think there are things our platform at Reforge will be able to do for these kinds of offers. There's a long period of time to make that easier and easier. No promises, but stay tuned.

Lenny (01:00:46):
Okay, okay. So then, going back maybe as a final question. For folks that are just like, "That sounds great. Maybe in the future, I want to become a full-time advisor, EIR person, writer person," what advice do you have for folks to set their career up for a place where they can get to a place where they can become full-time advisors, let's say?

Fareed Mosavat (01:01:04):
This is this generalized step I talked about in the learn loop. It becomes even more important if what you want to do is not just do your current job well, but be able to communicate why that expertise is valuable to other people, other companies across a wide range of things. So I would say choose your opportunities carefully to be building the right balance of depth and breadth across different things. You need to connect dots, so you do need different data points from different types of product work and different types of organizations because you don't want to be so narrow that only DDC eCommerce company that sell once-a-year purchases or whatever is the only thing you can work on. That's just an example. I could have come up with a bunch of others.

Fareed Mosavat (01:01:51):
You need to have some breadth, right, but it's like same problem, different industry. It's one way to think about depth that's focused. Different problem, same industry is another way to think about it, but you have to come up with a unique intersection that is clearly you are in the top tier of the people who know how to do that. That's a little bit nuanced. There's an art to it I think in some respects, but I think that's an important piece of the puzzle.

Fareed Mosavat (01:02:14):
Second, work at great places. I think this is good advice for almost all product managers in particular, but really, anybody working in tech, for better or for worse, where you worked matters to people for two reasons. One, it's easier to do great work at a place that is fundamentally working. When the tide is rising, there are tons of opportunities to make meaningful, deep, awesome impact. The second is what you talked about. You're going to be in the sales business eventually, and it's a lot easier to sell experience at places people have heard of than places nobody has heard of. Unfortunately, that's I think a big piece of this puzzle as well. I don't have to spend a lot of time talking about what Slack is. You probably don't have to spend a lot of time talking about what Airbnb is. I think that helps, and it is a meaningful piece of the puzzle.

Lenny (01:03:04):
Absolutely. Fareed, I feel like anybody that listen to this episode is going to be a better product manager. I'm very confident of that, and I'm really appreciative.

Fareed Mosavat (01:03:13):
I hope so.

Lenny (01:03:14):
I'm sure of it. So, just to close, where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Fareed Mosavat (01:03:21):
You can find me on Twitter almost most days, F-A-R-3-3-D. That's been my handle since I was a young man.

Lenny (01:03:29):
So complicated.

Fareed Mosavat (01:03:30):
So check me out there. It's just threes instead at Es, right? That's probably my social network of choice and best place to communicate or hear what I'm thinking about or what I'm doing. Obviously, I do a ton of work at Reforge. On our events, I toast a bunch of different things, do a lot of stuff. If you're interested in these kinds of topics, please, I don't want to make this a sales pitch, but we have a lot of programs that are dedicated to deep dives into the problems that we've talked about here. I'm dedicating this next chapter of my career to helping a wider range of product leaders be great at their jobs, and that's what we do for a living. I hope that we can help folks there.

Fareed Mosavat (01:04:06):
As to what people can help me with, I don't know. I'm always looking for people working on interesting stuff or with interesting, unique problems. If you're a founder working on something interesting and you're looking for an advisor, practical advisor, not for me, but we have a wide range of network experts that I'd be happy to connect folks with. If you're a product manager on a team that's looking to figure out how to break through on certain problems, reach out. Maybe we can help with Reforge or maybe I can help individually.

Lenny (01:04:35):
Thanks for being here, Fareed.

Fareed Mosavat (01:04:36):
Yeah. Cheers. Thanks for having me, Lenny. I think what you're doing is wonderful and making a big difference for PMs everywhere, so thank you.

Lenny (01:04:44):
Same. Thanks, man.

Fareed Mosavat (01:04:45):
Cheers.

Lenny (01:04:47):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Gaurav Misra (00:00:00):
There's rarely a time like this where so much is possible. Even like five, seven years ago, it's so hard to start a company. Everything feels like it's done, someone else is working on it. Suddenly, it's a time, right now, which I've never even experienced, where everything you try just works.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:14):
With people constantly hearing about all the things happening. Is there any tools or processes or approaches you've figured out to help stay focused?

Gaurav Misra (00:00:21):
Our engineering goal is every engineer should ship a marketable product every week.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:27):
I love just how wild that sounds. How do you maintain quality and make it all cohesive?

Gaurav Misra (00:00:31):
I actually think as a startup your job is to take on technical debt because that is how you operate faster than a bigger company. Bigger companies don't take contact technical debt, they pay it usually right away, or they're paying back technical debt from the days when they were a startup.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:45):
Is there anything else that in how you operate and the way you build product that you think is really unique and interesting?

Gaurav Misra (00:00:50):
We have what we think of as the public roadmap. This is basically what people have asked us for. There's all these surface areas where we receive user feedback, but these are all features that every competitor knows about. If a user is asking us for it, they're asking everybody for it.

(00:01:04):
It's not going to be a game changer in terms of winning against your competition. So we have a second roadmap which we think of as a secret roadmap.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:15):
Today my guest is Gaurav Misra. Gaurav was an early employee at Snap where he led the design engineering team, which he explains in the conversation. He's also an engineer at Microsoft and a couple other companies. Most recently, he's the co-founder and CEO of Captions, one of the most successful and cutting-edge consumer AI products, which lets you generate and edit talking videos with AI. They have over 10 million users and have raised over a hundred million dollars.

(00:01:39):
In our conversation, we essentially do an archeology of how a modern AI oriented startup operates, including how every single engineer at their company ships a marketable product or feature every single week. Why they have a secret roadmap, in addition to a regular roadmap. We also get in-depth about how Snap as a product team operated. What he's learned about what it takes to build a successful consumer and social app, why they had no PMs and how designers ran the show, which may or may not have been a great idea. And also what happens in a world where AI video is so good that you have no idea if it's real or not. This episode is for anyone that is building a product on top of AI. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app. And also, I just launched an insane deal for subscribers of my newsletter. Every yearly subscriber now gets a year free of Notion, Perplexity, Superhuman, Linear and Granola. Learn more at lennysnewsletter.com. With that, I bring you Gaurav Misra.

(00:02:39):
This episode is brought to you by Brex, the financial stack used by one in every three US venture-backed startups. Brex knows the nearly 40% of startups fail because they run out of cash, so they built a banking experience that focuses on helping founders get more from every dollar. It's a stark difference from traditional banking options that leave a startup's cash sitting idle while chipping away at it with fees. To help founders protect cash and extend runway, Brex combined the best things about checking treasury and FDIC insurance in one powerhouse account. You can send and receive money worldwide at lightning speed. You can get 20x the standard FDIC protection through program banks and you can earn industry-leading yield from your first dollar while still being able to access your funds anytime. To learn more, check out Brex at brex.com/banking-solutions. That's brex.com/banking-solutions.

(00:03:36):
This episode is brought to you by Paragon. The integration infrastructure for B2B SaaS companies is AI on your 2025 product roadmap. Whether you need to enable RAG with your user's external data like Google Drive files, Gong transcripts, or Jira tickets, or build AI agents that can automate work across your user's other tools, integrations are the foundation. But building all these integrations in-house will cost you years of engineering, time you don't have given the fast pace of AI. That's where Paragon's all-in-one integration platform comes in. Build scalable workflows to ingest all of your user's external data into your RAG pipelines. And leverage, ActionKit, their latest product to instantly give your AI agents access to over 100 integrations and thousands of third-party actions with a single API call.

(00:04:24):
Leading AI companies like AI21, you.com, 11X, and Copy.ai are already shipping new integrations seven times faster with Paragon keeping their engineers focused on core product development. Ready to accelerate your AI roadmap this year, visit useparagon.com/lenny to get a free MVP of your next product integration.

(00:04:50):
Gaurav, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Gaurav Misra (00:04:53):
Thank you. Thanks for having me. Excited.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:55):
I very rarely have early stage founders on the podcast, but I wanted to chat with you because you're at the center of so much of what is top of mind for a lot of builders these days, AI and video, and just consumer and social apps.

(00:05:11):
Also going viral and finding new marketing channels. So I think there's a lot that people can learn from the way you approach product, the way you've built product and the way you just think about where things are going. So again, thank you for being here.

Gaurav Misra (00:05:26):
Appreciate it. Honestly, it's an exciting time. I got to say like there's rarely a time like this where so much is possible. In normal times, if you think about even five, seven years ago, it's so hard to start a company. It's so hard to come up with an idea. It's just like everything feels like it's done, someone else is working on it. Or it's like, oh it's been tried three times and failed three times. And suddenly, it's a time, right now, which I've never even experienced honestly in my career, where everything you try just works.

(00:05:56):
There's so many possibilities. There's not enough people in the world to work on them. Honestly. There's more things that can be done than there's people available to do them. It is just such a rare thing. And honestly, it's not going to last forever. We are going to catch up to this, but just feels lucky to be part of that movement. It's awesome.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:17):
When you said everything is working, I think what's an important distinction there is the building of the tool works. The tech is now there to build all these things that have not been possible before. The thing that is increasingly, difficult, and I want to get your take on this, is getting anyone to pay attention and stick with your thing because it's so easy to build stuff and everything is just awesome and interesting. It's harder to get people to pay attention and stick with your product.

(00:06:42):
So I guess is there anything there, you've learned that you've built a number of successful products. We'll talk about Snap and what you're doing now, about just, I don't know, what you need to think about these days to get anyone to pay attention and then stick around.

Gaurav Misra (00:06:54):
Yeah, I mean honestly it's a great point and I think there is a lot of hype obviously, and part of it, that's what's driving a lot of this growth for a lot of companies. And I think from a user acquisition/marketing perspective, in a world five or seven years ago, if you were making something novel and you went to users and it was like, "Oh, we got something better." People are going to be like, "Well, whatever. Everybody says they got something better. I don't care." But today, and this is not probably the way you should do it, but you can go and just say, "We've rethought this thing with AI." And a bunch of people will just be like, "Well, how?" Or "Maybe I should check this out."

(00:07:33):
They'll just try it. Obviously, you have to deliver on the promises. If you don't deliver, people will come in, they'll play around a bunch and then just leave. But if you can truly deliver on the promises, there's great opportunities to require users at scale. So I think that's slightly different. And I don't know how long that lasts, but it is definitely a different time from that perspective. I do think also at the core of building products is solving problems. I think a lot of people sort of get caught up in this, well, it's cool and people will come for the cool right now. People will come in and be like, "Well, let me check it out. It's cool."

(00:08:11):
But at the end of the day, if you're just building a playground and people play around in the playground and then they leave after playing around, it's not a business. So I think that is still key. You have to be solving real problems.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:25):
As we were talking, I'm thinking about every day there's something that would maybe a few years ago be news for a year. Holy shit, this is now possible. Now it's like every day something like that happens and then we're like, all right, so what I think about is like, we'll have AGI one of these days or super intelligence and everyone's going to be, "Oh, amazing." And then, "Okay, what's for dinner?"

Gaurav Misra (00:08:46):
Isn't that already happening? Think about, in a way, I self-reflect on this sometimes if like, you've seen Iron Man and stuff, they have the J.A.R.V.I.S thing and you've seen Interstellar and they have the TARS machine. They're talking back and forth with these things like bouncing ideas. That is science fiction. That's literally science fiction. Okay, it's not perfect, but it exists in a way that nobody could have imagined. That's science fiction has become reality and I feel like nobody cares.

(00:09:18):
In a way, you would've expected the world to be turned upside down, but it feels like almost in a way so slow and people are like, yes, adoption is happening, but I feel like it's almost a shocking development in a way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:31):
It feels like you guys have done a good job staying top of mind and continuing to get people excited because to your point, there's so much happening. How do you get people to continue to be like, "Oh, okay, wow, what their building is actually is interesting and continues to be interesting."

(00:09:45):
Anything you've learned about just what it takes to stay top of mind and continue to pull people back and get people re-excited over and over?

Gaurav Misra (00:09:51):
Hundred percent. I mean, I think honestly it just comes down to not just AI for the sake of AI or AI for the sake of excitement or hype or novelty or whatever that is, it's actually effective AI like AI that solves real problems, practical problems. And the fundamentals haven't changed. In a way, there's three steps to building products. You identify a user problem, you apply some technology to solve that problem, but then finally you have some mechanism to find people who have that problem. If you can do all three of those things, then in any environment you can create great products. But I think right now what's different is so much is changing on the technology side that you can create products that could not have been created before and solve problems that could not have been solved before. And that's creating the opportunity.

(00:10:45):
And for us, especially in the video space, it's truly endless. We've just begun, our goal specifically for video is not to build professional tools. We're not building for professionals at all. We're building for the person who could not have created video before. They didn't have the tools, the skills, the means to be able to create video and now they can because they're able to jump over that skill gap or that time gap. Maybe they're business owners, they don't have time, they want results, and honestly a lot to solve there just tons.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:20):
Solve people's problems. Easier said than done, but it's a good reminder. In the end that's all that matters. Something that I always think about with people in your shoes is just how do you not get overwhelmed and how do you know what to pay attention to? How do you stay focused?

(00:11:36):
Any tips there for folks that are just reading every day, a new announcement, and then just like I just, how do I? What do I do? There's too much.

Gaurav Misra (00:11:44):
It is the new problem of product development in a way. There's too many possible paths you can go down. There's too many ideas, there's too many things you could do. And I mean obviously, prioritization is always an important skill set and has always been, but it's become an even more important skill set right now because you have to figure out what not to pay attention to. Our general framework for it is to look for user demand, and actually the easiest way to check for user demand is to just see what has virality.

(00:12:10):
Usually, what has virality and what people want to share and talk about, there's something at the core of it that actually is interesting. Now, it may not always be interesting in a way that's like maybe it's a one-time use case. Maybe it's not something that people would do repeatedly. Maybe it's not something you could build like a subscription business off of, but oftentimes there's some things, some core element of it that has resonated with people. And if you can identify that core and then mold it into fitting into your business, it's actually a great way to identify what actually works. And we have these tools right now. We don't have to build anything. You can just kind talk about it and people will share it, share the idea.

(00:12:49):
And you can measure how well the product might be received even before you built anything. So it's a great tool we use for prioritization. We spend a lot of time on social media. Obviously, our app is often used for social media, so a lot of our employees will spend a lot of time on social media. We look at what the trends are, what's happening, and based on that we can get a pretty good read of what might resonate well with people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:15):
So as a leader of a company with people constantly hearing about all the things happening, is there any tools or processes or approaches you've figured out to help people continue, stay focused, not get excited about every shiny new object and actually ship things? I

Gaurav Misra (00:13:30):
I mean honestly, it's all about incrementality in a way. I think we do aim to ship every week. Our engineering goal is every engineer should ship a marketable product every week. And so what's a marketable product is a product that you can show to users and the user might subscribe or pay for the app just for that or come to the app essentially just for that. And that's why table stakes features, let's say we're talking about word processor or something. If you had auto format or just table stakes stuff like justify alignment or something, no one's going to come to your word processor for justify alignment. You can market that because it's obvious, of course it exists, but if you did something unique that nobody else has done, you can go and show that to people and people will come to your app just for that.

(00:14:22):
And even if your app doesn't have a lot of the obvious stuff, maybe it doesn't have justify alignment, people will jump over that just to use these new tools and new abilities that you might be building and marketing. So we try to do every engineer one marketable feature per week, and a lot of that stuff may not work, but a lot of it does work and we can figure out obviously, where to put in more effort, things that start to work, we double down on those things, build more. People often complain because think about it, in one week where we're shipping, it's not complete, it's MVP, truly.

(00:14:57):
And we slice the hell out of it. We take the design and we cut, cut, cut until we can really say that it's going to be useless if we cut anymore. We get that out and people come in. And if things are going well, people will use it despite all the problems that it might have, and now people will complain and we'll have a list of problems and we know what to do next. That's a starting point essentially. As long as we're shipping one a week, we get a ton of volume of features and products and directions we're releasing, cut a lot of that. What remains expand from there. So it works really well, and it keeps people focused.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:37):
I love the simplicity of that. I love just how wild that sounds for a lot of companies I imagine. Every engineer ships a marketable feature or product every week.

Gaurav Misra (00:15:46):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:48):
There's some people listening to this and are just completely stressed out by this idea and there's some people listening who are like, this is exactly how I want to work. This is how every company should build.

Gaurav Misra (00:15:56):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:58):
How do you maintain quality and make it all cohesive? I imagine that's the big trade-off. Just, any tricks there for folks that want to maybe start operating this way.

Gaurav Misra (00:16:06):
Quality is not something you compromise on most of the time. I think yes, there's strategic compromises in quality, but most of the time what you want to do is have a bar for quality where people should come in and if they're using the feature, it should work, right? Of course. And the way to cut down on time, and I think this is a mistake people make a lot of the time, is when time is being pressured downward, a lot of times engineers, PMS, designers, they will cut on quality rather than cutting on scope. And actually you can cut on scope. It's actually, the method that we use is we look at every element that's going to take any time to build and we just say, what if we remove this? Is the product still useful?

(00:16:48):
And we keep repeating that until we remove whatever's left and we say it's going to be useless at this point. And that becomes the one-week project, right? It actually really works. It narrows down to the core of what you're really trying to ask. So for example, let's say we wanted to build something to add an image on your video or something like that, and this is a really basic idea. I just made it up right now. And you might imagine a design in which you import your image from your camera roll, but before it lands in your video you might want to remove the background. You might want to change the hue and saturation or something like that. And you might expect a designer to design all of those features and you let it design, but you really quickly realize that you can cut all of that stuff.

(00:17:38):
You can cut the background or you can cut the hue saturation. All you really need is pick. And then there might be a picker. We need a picker with a library, with a lot of different type. What if you want to pull from the cloud? What if you want to pull from the drive or something like that? Cut all of that, right? And essentially come down to the core, which is just native picker from the camera, lens, straight in the video, no UI. And that is already, that should be useful. If that's not useful, then anything else built on top of that is also useless. So that's how we might go about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:12):
That last sentence is so key to this. It's the core idea of ship small iterative features before you invest a lot in something to figure out is there anything there, is this worth spending weeks on?

Gaurav Misra (00:18:24):
Totally. And I think the coolest part of this method is the first thing that the users will come in, they'll use the thing, they'll import images and the first thing they'll complain about is what bothers them the most? Is it human saturation? Is it background removal? Is it picking from the cloud? You'll just get the most complaints about that thing.

(00:18:43):
People will be like, and people will be honest about it or they'll be like, "This sucks. It doesn't even have background removal. What kind of image thing is this?" And you have to take that feedback and just next week you can ship in a single week all the things that the user's complaining about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:59):
And then they're like, wow, this team is shipping like crazy.

Gaurav Misra (00:18:59):
Yes. Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:01):
Solve all my problems. So responsive. This connects a common sign of product market fit, which is when people are complaining about the thing that means they actually care enough to complain and that's a really good sign if they're complaining about something.

Gaurav Misra (00:19:13):
It's very true, very true. If nobody complains, it's almost red flag.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:18):
A lot of this is turning into an archeology of a modern product team and startup. So I want to keep digging. This is not where I was planning to go, but this is awesome. I love that this approach of every engineer shipping something every week that's marketable connects directly to where I started this conversation, which is how do you stay above the noise?

(00:19:36):
And part of the answer is just ship stuff constantly, and just continue to impress people. Like, "Here's a new amazing video feature." "Look at this thing."

Gaurav Misra (00:19:43):
Exactly. Yep. I think it's definitely key, right? And there's enough area and enough scope for that to happen. I think truly in normal times it may not be possible to create that much roadmap that quickly, but I think because there's so much innovation underlying all this, there is that scope available. The roadmap almost seems unlimited, just truly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:07):
Okay. The other question I imagine people would be wondering is how do you work on longer-term projects that take many weeks? There's also infrastructure, I guess, back-end stuff. So maybe answer those questions.

(00:20:17):
How do you think about long-term stuff and then how do you deal with back-end stuff that isn't a feature that anyone would care for?

Gaurav Misra (00:20:22):
Yep. Usually, we'll dedicate time to that separately. For example, usually Q4 for us is infrastructure quarter. We just go and build all the infrastructure. Q4 is generally, we've already delivered a ton of products and stuff. We're feeling pretty good about the rest of the year. Things are winding down. Obviously, holidays and stuff coming up. And so we spend all that time paying the technical debt.

(00:20:48):
I actually think there's a unique thing to think here about technical debt in general. And as a startup, your job is to take on technical debt because that is how you operate faster than a bigger company. Bigger companies don't take on technical debt, they pay it usually right away. Or they're paying back technical debt from the days when they were a startup, and they took on a lot of it. I mean Snaps, I used to work at Snap and there was a lot of examples of that over there, and I'm sure it happens at every other company.

(00:21:19):
And we think about it as like, well, is this a problem we need to solve today or is this a problem that the 50th engineer or the hundredth engineer or the 500th engineer can solve? And if it is a problem that a future engineer can solve, we should use that future engineer now. Essentially, that's what we're doing. And we're saying we're going to push this to somebody in the future. And by the way, if the company fails, that engineer will never be hired and all this won't matter anyways. So it's like financial debt in many ways. Financial debt is taken on to create leverage. It can be a good thing like if you're buying a house, you take on debt and you can buy something probably more than you can afford without taking on debt.

(00:22:04):
And it's the same thing. You can create products that you wouldn't be able to build with a small team that you have by taking on strategic technical debt. It's very positive actually.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:13):
Wow, this is such a cool idea. And where my mind goes is that future engineer may be an AI agent engineer.

Gaurav Misra (00:22:19):
Exactly, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:21):
Just solving problems, just on technical debt in you.

Gaurav Misra (00:22:24):
Exactly. Some engineer in the future Five-hundred engineer many years from now will get a promotion because they solve this big problem that those really bad early engineers created.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:36):
So obviously, there's a line to this. There's only so much debt you can take on before you become a big problem.

(00:22:43):
Is there any thoughts on just that balance of just how much is too much and how if it's enough for a net feature engineer or just-

Gaurav Misra (00:22:50):
Yeah, I mean I think generally the rule of thumb is every piece of debt that you take on you have to pay interest on. So if there is debt that you've taken on, there's 1% or 2% of your time that is going to be taken away every day in maintaining bugs and issues and restarts and crashes and things that are happening with that. Because you did it the fast way, something's going to go wrong with it. Every day. 1% of your time will be taken away. If you take on enough debt, you'll be paying 80 or 90% interest and you'll not have any time to do anything new. You'll just be paying interest. That's all.

(00:23:23):
And that's when you get into the mode of like, oh, we're just keeping the lights on. We don't have any engineers to do anything. We're just keeping the lights on. That's the failure case for a startup. So in a way, you have a technical debt runway. Once you run out, once you've taken on too much debt. And if you haven't delivered value in that time, enough value to hire the engineers to pay the interest or just pay off the debt, you'll get in trouble.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:46):
I love that. That's such a nice heuristic of how to think about when to invest in something. I don't want to go down this too far, but just a thought I have is ... because sometimes there's big technical decisions you got to make that impact the way everything builds or is built in the future. I imagine those you spend more time on and take really seriously.

Gaurav Misra (00:24:02):
Definitely. Yeah, I mean I think as long as it's possible for wherever it's like a two-way door, you can do whatever you want. I mean this is a classic methodology. If it's A one-way door, it's worth thinking about and sort of doing correctly at least as much as the one-way door would matter to you in the future.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:22):
How much do your engineers use Cursor and tools like that to build? How much is AI helping your team move?

Gaurav Misra (00:24:28):
A hundred percent, yeah. I mean everybody's using it. It's super helpful. I mean even I'm using it honestly. Yeah, it's a huge multiplier for the team, no doubt.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:40):
And is a Cursor specifically. Is there anything else that you guys found useful?

Gaurav Misra (00:24:43):
Yeah, we are using Cursor. Yep. We've tried all the different tools. We were using Devin as well, which is another, you know? That's more advanced, I guess. It's solving bugs for you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:52):
Yeah, Devin's basically, I think it's 500 bucks a month and it's like an AI engineer that you just chat within Slack.

Gaurav Misra (00:24:58):
Exactly, yeah. In a way, these are the types of things that us as a startup can do that bigger companies can't just, you know, they can't just pull in Devin. They have to get 30 lawyers in the room first before that happens.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:11):
And they're all called Devin, these are like agents. Everyone's going to have hundreds of Devins working at their company.

Gaurav Misra (00:25:15):
Exactly. You can have multiple Devins. I actually heard you can have a manager of Devins who's managing Devins.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:21):
I love that managers are all getting layered, like unlayered and then they're going to have AI managers. That's the ultimate bait and switch.

Gaurav Misra (00:25:30):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:32):
Okay. Is there anything else that in how you operate and build the way you build product or set up the way you build product that you think is really unique and interesting that other people might be able to learn from?

Gaurav Misra (00:25:42):
Our process is a bit interesting in that way. We have a design team, we have a PM team. We're very early on those teams right now. And obviously, we have engineering. And we have all the different surface areas. So iOS, Android, web. There's backend team, machine learning team, research team. So generally, when we're developing products, we may start off with a PM first approach where we're finding some sort of overall issue that we want to take on some new area or pillar we want to take on and then creating sort of product specs from there.

(00:26:17):
But a lot of times we'll also start the opposite way. We'll first design something without even having any idea of what or why we're doing it, but we'll design a bunch of different things and then we'll sit down with the PMs and look at the designs and just go over one and the next and the next until we find interesting things and ideas that pop out of that.

(00:26:36):
And a lot of times that leads to us discovering things that we wouldn't have discovered if we were just too focused on the metrics and the numbers and things like that. So it's almost reversing the process a little bit and starting with design first, but it can often result in finding unique ideas basically. I also think that we have a unique setup in how we create our roadmap. So normally you have a single roadmap and we actually divide a roadmap into two different roadmaps. So we have what we think of as the public roadmap. This is basically what people have asked us for. So there's all these surface areas where we receive user feedback and we look at all that feedback and people will ask for features. They'll ask for, I want background removal, I want to undo and redo, I want to upload longer videos, whatever it is, a bunch of different features.

(00:27:26):
And we'll just make a list of that. And just like anything else, we'll prioritize it and we'll look at how many people it affects and what the possible markets are and just get it done basically one at a time.

(00:27:37):
But these are all features that every competitor knows about. These are public. If a user's asking us for it, they're asking everybody for it. And every team has essentially more or less the same list and everybody's prioritizing it. And yeah, sure you can win a little by extra nicely prioritizing it or winning a little in prioritization or execution or something, but it's not going to be a game changer in terms of winning against your competition. So we have a second roadmap which we think of as a secret roadmap. So this is a roadmap that nobody asked for anything on this like literally, nobody has ever asked for it.

(00:28:13):
And if a user were shown something on it, they might be like, "I don't need this. I don't know what this is." But given our unique vantage point, our unique understanding of the problem set, the user space and the technology, we've come up with some special ideas that we think will completely revolutionize how something is used where we can truly change the behavior of the user. I think that's what at is at the core of. It's like people are doing things one way if we're able to show them another way. And once they try it, they never go back. That's what a product is, that's success. And those are the types of ideas that we put on the secret roadmap. These are things we never talk about publicly, never tell anybody about, and we announce them and just give them to users and see the effects.

(00:29:00):
A lot of this we come up with through brainstorming. So we do actually do quarterly brainstorming, company-wide, everybody's included like everybody from. It's not just a product team thing, it's like engineering, recruiting, everybody's included in. And we all come up with marketing, obviously, everybody comes up with ideas, we vote on the ideas, rank the ideas, and then the product team takes over from there and thinks about like feasibility and technology and what the different things could be. So this is a way where we can take all that noise that people are getting, everybody's browsing social media, seeing all these different things that are blowing up, these models and advancements and we can get all that information together and provide a unique internal roadmap where how are we going to approach and create value out of all of these different advances that are happening.

(00:29:49):
So that's our general methodology. And a lot of times the biggest wins will come from the secret roadmap. That's the game-changing stuff. It's not going to be the user requests usually that are going to do that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:02):
I love just how calling it the secret roadmap makes it extra interesting. [inaudible 00:30:07]

Gaurav Misra (00:30:06):
Exactly, yeah. It's a secret.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:09):
It's a secret. I'm not even going to ask you what's on that secret roadmap. You can't tell me.

(00:30:15):
What's an example of feature that came out of that secret roadmap that's been a big deal for you guys?

Gaurav Misra (00:30:18):
Tons. I mean, I'll give you an example from a long time ago. One of the first AI features we added after the app initially took off was this feature called eye contact. So this was a feature where if you're recording something, oftentimes people who are new to recording a video might read from a script or a teleprompter or something like that and they might have that off-screen. So it looks like you're reading and it's not great from the perspective of the video itself or the viewer of the video. So we had this feature where it basically shifts your eyes to look at the camera.

(00:30:52):
And we were actually the first company to build this. We worked with Nvidia on this. It's actually really interesting because when we originally reached out to Nvidia about this. They were not sure why we needed this. And they actually gave it to us pretty openly and were excited about some sort of partnership of how can we get this technology into something that could be useful.

(00:31:19):
But we saw this creator use case which was unique, and it was one of the ideas that came out of the brainstorm and we threw it on there, we launched it. It was a huge success. I mean, I'll be honest, the video, the ad that we made, a social media post that demonstrates this was so viral, it was made in basically every language around the world. It still till today gets millions of views. We find reposts and reposts of that thing that other people have created that get millions and millions and millions of views because people are like, "Wow, this is a great idea."

(00:31:59):
And now it's been copied the hell out of, I think it's available basically on every app you can imagine. For good reason of course. But that's one of the ideas that came out of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:10):
You talked about how you come up with these secret roadmap ideas. I'm just intrigued by this. I'm going to spend a little more time here.

(00:32:14):
Does your team ever work with an AI LLM to help brainstorm? I imagine that's where things will go, where you're actually jamming. The AI agent is brainstorming along with you.

Gaurav Misra (00:32:25):
Honestly, I would like for it to go there. It hasn't gone there yet. We haven't done that exactly, because the problem is context. And I think just the context of understanding the user, the use case, it's so abstract. Even right now, I feel like I understand our users obviously, but I can't exactly verbalize why that is or how that is, a little bit abstract. And I spend a lot of time with RPMs and designers imparting anything that I understand and I've learned over the many years I've been working on this, how do I impart this to them? But then it's a challenge because I can't even verbalize it myself. And so it's an extra hard challenge to figure out how do I put this context? How do I make it available to an LLM when I can't even put it into words exactly. And honestly, this is probably my own feeling but, and I need to work on this, but there is something to it.

(00:33:26):
I do remember at Snap for example, I think one of the most unique things about Snap and the CEO Evan Spiegel was that he had an unmatched understanding of the user. I think years and years and years of the company's existence past, almost a decade. And nobody understood the user like he did. He would come up with ideas that everybody would disagree with and we would launch them and there would be hits, just hits after hits. And nobody would understand why. Everyone would line up and be like, "Great." Round of applause for everyone, but no one knew why.

(00:34:07):
A great example of that is a lot of this was figured out in retrospect too. I think there was a point at which Snap declared that they're a camera company and a lot of people laugh at them and said, "Camera. What are we making digital cameras or something?" Or, "Why is it a camera company?"

(00:34:22):
But I think at the core of it was this idea that Snapchat opens to the camera and that was actually the differentiator. That actually that small decision was holding the entire company against all competition because when the moment passes where your friend is doing something funny and you need to capture it, you're not going to open Instagram or anything else because it doesn't open to the camera. You're going to open Snapchat because you can capture it right away. And Instagram can never copy that because all their metrics are going to go down as soon as they do that. So that is a fundamental understanding. And I figured this out much later, actually, but it's such a powerful idea.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:08):
I'm glad you talked about Snap. That's where I definitely wanted to go. This is where I was going to start. So I'm glad we circled back to your experience at Snap. So the reason I am interested in this is if you think about social networks like Snap is basically the last social network to have launched and stuck around other than TikTok, which I don't think is a social network. I think it's just this content platform. I don't think you're really interacting with people really. And that was 2011 when it launched. So it's been like 15 years since the last social network launch that has worked.

(00:35:40):
And I think it's interesting also because there's rarely been a lot of insight into just how Snap operates. You were there really early. You're a big deal at Snap. You built a lot of really important features. So I wanted to spend a little time here, and it feels like a lot of things you learn from Snap you're bringing to your company now. So let me just ask, I think you may have answered this, but I'm curious if there's something else here just broadly maybe other than Ev's brain, what do you think was core to Snap being a successful consumer social product?

Gaurav Misra (00:36:12):
There were a couple of different things that went well. I do think for a company like Snapchat or Social Network, the core product market fit can be extremely strong. Essentially, the reason that people are downloading it, the way that it's spreading, the way that it's distributing, the way that it's inviting friends or sending Snaps or whatever it is, that product market fit can be so strong sometimes that it can be hard to actually build something because you actually can't tell if what you're building is what's responsible for growing the thing or if it's actually hurting it and it's growing despite what you're doing basically.

(00:36:53):
And I think because of that, it actually sometimes teaches people the wrong things. It teaches people that the contrarian thing that they were doing was right when it was actually just wrong and the company just grew despite it. And I think some of the things that Snap did well and it needed to do really was to continue innovating, right?

(00:37:17):
Because for a company like Snap, it has a ton of competition. Social networks are monopolies by nature and there's a lot of reasons for Facebook or any other social network to stop the growth of Snapchat. And they tried, they tried really, really hard. And the way that Snap was avoiding that was by innovating. I think the core of it was the setup that they had, which was very unique. I've never seen anything like it. I've worked at a bunch of different companies, but obviously there's a CEO and the CEO was very product-led, his designer himself, but he surrounded himself with the design team. That was sort of the central team in the company. And the design team was like 10, 12 people. Basically, pretty small, even at 5, 6,000 employees it was that small still.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:02):
Oh wow. At 6 or 6,000 employees. The design team was, you said how many, five or six people?

Gaurav Misra (00:38:07):
10, 12 people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:08):
10, 12. And to add to that, there's no PMs really for a long time. That was before.

Gaurav Misra (00:38:12):
For a long time, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:14):
Big difference.

Gaurav Misra (00:38:14):
Initially, there were no PMs at all. PMs were introduced with monetization. Once monetization was a big sort of element, that's where PMs came in. Today, I think there's a ton of, or there's an adequate number of PMs across the company, but there was a long period of time, especially when the innovation was happening, when there were a much, much smaller number of PMs and it was very designer led. But at the same time, I think that's slightly misleading in the way that these weren't your sort of average designers.

(00:38:43):
These were designers who were actually PMs as well. That's what the secret sauce was. They were able to not just design but also do the PM part which is a big responsibility. It's a lot of work, especially for that many employees, but it gave the CEO a way to have granular control over what exactly was being launched in which part of the app at all times.

(00:39:05):
Because he could meet with a set of 10 or 12 people and know every change that was happening that was user impacting. A lot of changes were being worked on that were infrastructure and types of things that keep going on in the back end where you're improving ranking and whatever that might be, performance and things like that. And those were not usually his concern. He was concerned with what UI are we adding where? And if you needed to add UI to the app, you needed it designed. And if there's no designers in the company, except for a handful who talk directly to the CEO, you create a very granular control over what's being launched in the company. So everything needed to be approved by Evan. If you hadn't approved it, it's not going out. So the design team actually held a lot of power in that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:50):
This is awesome. So what I'm hearing partly is, I don't know if this is true, but it feels true that to make a consumer app that is successful and breaks through, you almost need a singular mind that continues to stay in the weeds on everything. And the way Evan did that is very close to the design team who basically ran product.

Gaurav Misra (00:40:10):
That's very true. Yeah, it's very true. And he was able to keep the context of the entire app in his head at the same time. He knew the interdependencies and what we're doing and why we're doing it. And so that gave him just very granular control over the company's product roadmap.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:26):
It makes me think about Brian Chesky and Airbnb is a consumer product, it's not a social network, but I wonder if that's just an interesting insight just for consumer products. They will generally do better if there's one person with a really ... the right sort of combination of experiences, insights, and just they continue to run and own every detail.

Gaurav Misra (00:40:46):
Definitely. And also the ability to bring about change, the ability to truly energize an entire organization to do something that's not just incremental but fundamental.

(00:40:58):
<< Founder mode >>

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:00):
Exactly.

Gaurav Misra (00:41:01):
Founder mode. That's what we're getting to, basically.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:04):
Yeah, ever heard of it. Okay. And then you said that these designers, so I know it's famous that Snap had no PMs for a long time. Designers were PMs. This point you made about the designers where PME is really important. I think a lot of people look at this, they're like, "Amazing. We're just going to hire just designers. We don't need all these PMs. Slow everything down. Just tell us what not to build." Can you just talk about the level of these designers? What allowed them to be as successful as they were without any PMs?

Gaurav Misra (00:41:32):
Yeah, I mean I think what was expected from the designers now was not just the ability to design, the skill set of designing, which all of them were IC designers by the way. And there were no reports, so they weren't allowed to have reports actually. And so they were designing everything themselves, but they also had to have the leadership skills to go figure out the roadmap, write all the documents, work with the different teams, figure out shipping schedules and just know everything, not just the technical and the engineering part, but the UX and the UI and the product needs and why are we doing this.

(00:42:15):
The roadmap, there's just a ton to keep in mind. And that means that it was a job that was just highly ... it was very high workload. No doubt, very high workload. These people work really hard and they were paid highly too. For what it's worth, they were paid way higher than you would expect designers or PMs or engineers to be paid with quarterly bonuses and all kinds of things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:43):
That's interesting. And it reminds, people always say, "Why do you need PMs?" There's like someone has to do the work that a PM does. They're not sitting around doing nothing. And it's important to note the person that will take on the PME work, they have to be good at it and enjoy it. And a lot of designers don't want to be doing writing docs and organizing stakeholders and getting alignment and ...

Gaurav Misra (00:43:03):
100%, 100%. That's why it was so hard to find those people who were able to do two things. I actually think there's an insight in there is innovation between when you're merging craft right between two different functions. And I do think there's something special about one person doing two different functions or at least being able to do. And I think a lot of unique insight and innovation can come from that.

(00:43:31):
I actually think on my personal side, I eventually joined the design team. I started at Snap on the engineering team. I eventually joined the design team over the last two years that I was at Snap. And a big part of what I did there was create this function called design engineering. And that was actually a different combination. It wasn't the designer PM. It was the designer engineer. The person who can think of the UX design it and also build it and launch it, all of those things.

(00:44:03):
And we saw both the ability to take designers and teach them engineering and take engineers and teach them design as part of that. Obviously, the reason that we created that function was very different. It was actually to continue innovating as the company got bigger. One of the problems that we identified was that as the company got bigger and bigger and there's like 500 engineers, 1,000 engineers, 2,000 engineers, 3,000, suddenly it just becomes very difficult to do everything.

(00:44:32):
Everything is a six-month project or a one-year project. Every product is a massive investment of 500 engineers and a lot of time. And so you really have to pick your bets. If you get it wrong, if you are innovating and trying to create new products and you spend 500 engineers for a year and it doesn't work, it's a big problem. You're going to be in trouble, especially if we're coming like Snap where everybody was copying what they're doing so they had to constantly innovate, create new stuff and push the bounds.

(00:44:59):
I think Evan's philosophy was always he didn't fight the things that were getting copied, right? Stories got copied pretty much straight up. A lot of things that Snap created got copied, but he was more of the mindset of like, "Let's expand the pie, do something new and push the boundaries." We'll keep innovating basically. And so to do that with that scale of a company becomes really hard. And so we had this idea of let's create a small team where we can go and pretest a lot of these ideas because we had a lot of ideas and we can't go and build all of these things. So the idea was create a small team of these design engineers, people who are able to do the entire product design engineering process in their head and can put together early versions of the product, which we would actually bake into the Snapchat app itself.

(00:45:46):
And we were able to even test, for example, run a test in Australia, see how it's performing. Run a test in a couple of high schools, just a couple of high schools, see how people behave. And that way we already have data on how this might perform in a real world environment, but we haven't built it to production level. It's a prototype, essentially. It's how a startup might build something.

(00:46:08):
The same idea of what we're doing at our company now, build fast, get it out there, get feedback, understand whether it works or not, and then work with the engineering team to build it at a scale. Once we understand the product and the dynamics, then it makes sense to put on 500 engineers for six months to build it.

(00:46:25):
So that was a big part of it. I think the nice thing that came out of it that was completely unexpected but actually transformational for me in a way was obviously in big organizations, alignment is a big issue. How do you get everybody on the same page? And a big part of a PM's job is actually to create alignment and it can be a lot of work because you go talk to all these stakeholders and get them on the same page.

(00:46:48):
But one of the insights that we had, which was unique was as the company gets bigger, you can actually create alignment by causing internal virality. If there's enough people in the company, it actually starts acting like a consumer base might. If you share something interesting with someone, they will share it with somebody else because they think it's interesting and you can actually create virality inside a company.

(00:47:16):
So one thing that we would do is we would create these prototype products. We would just go into an area, redo a bunch of stuff, create these prototype products that didn't exist in Snapchat normally, and then we would just share the build and it would explode. It would just go viral inside the company. Day after day we would hear from engineers, then managers, then VPs, then eventually from Evan being like, "Oh my God, everyone's talking about this. Why am I the last one to hear about it?"

(00:47:47):
So it would create instant alignment across the company of this is exciting, this is something that we want to get behind. And everyone would be asking, "When are we doing this? When is this happening? I see someone's already working on it." So it was a great way to do that. And once we really understood that the product actually had good dynamics and we had tested it, it was a great way to get it out in front of everybody and create this idea of, "Hey, we're all working on this. This is the future."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:17):
Today's episode is brought to you by Coda. I personally use Coda every single day to manage my podcast and also to manage my community. It's where I put the questions that I plan to ask every guest that's coming on the podcast. It's where I put my community resources. It's how I manage my workflows. Here's how Coda can help you.

(00:48:35):
Imagine starting a project at work and your vision is clear. You know exactly who's doing what and where to find the data that you need to do your part. In fact, you don't have to waste time searching for anything because everything your team needs from project trackers and OKRs to documents and spreadsheets lives in one tab all in Coda. With Coda's collaborative all in one workspace, you get the flexibility of docs, the structure of spreadsheets, the power of applications, and the intelligence of AI all in one easy to organize tab.

(00:49:04):
Like I mentioned earlier, I use Coda every single day. And more than 50,000 teams trust Coda to keep them more aligned and focused. If you're a startup team looking to increase alignment and agility, Coda can help you move from planning to execution in record time. To try it for yourself, go to coda.io/lenny today and get six months free of the team plan for startups. That's coda.io/lenny to get started for free and get six months of the team plan. coda.io/lenny.

(00:49:34):
Another thread I want to follow up on is prototyping. It feels like that is where a lot of PM work is going is getting straight to a prototype versus design or versus PRDs. And it feels like that's something that you did and worked super well. Basically, it's a team to prototype ideas that in theory now you can just build really quickly with AI. So I think that's really interesting, seeing where the feature's going, just ...

Gaurav Misra (00:50:00):
100%. Getting things in people's hands, trying it out. Oftentimes, unless you truly try it out, in design, it can, in theory, look good with all the perfect conditions, but when you actually use it, you realize it's actually not that useful, for example. Or when you give it to users. And some of this is intuition, honestly, just like anything else, but there's nothing like getting something in the hands of users at the end of the day.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:23):
I love how many of these things you brought over to your current company, and I'm trying to think about, one is this idea of just constantly innovating feels like that's informed and tell me what I'm missing, but that feels like that's informed. The ship market will feature every single week. This idea of getting design, starting almost with design versus PM a lot of times. I'm curious why you don't even go straight to prototype in those cases. Is it just the tools aren't there yet or?

Gaurav Misra (00:50:47):
I mean, I think our shipping process is fast enough that within a week we can get it out anyways. So that way we just get user feedback, which is even better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:55):
And then the other really interesting thing, I'm trying to visualize that triangle of a product team, the triad of PM, engineer, design. Feels like you guys at Snap took the corners, not the corners, the line of that triangle. And you have design engineers. You have design PMs. I imagine engineers were PME already. They're very product oriented PMs. Did you have a function called design PMs? Probably not.

Gaurav Misra (00:51:20):
I mean honestly, it's interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:21):
Sorry, engineer PMs.

Gaurav Misra (00:51:23):
Yeah, engineer PMs should be a thing, I feel like, or every engineer should strive to understand the product, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:29):
Yeah. A lot of companies operate that way. Like Stripe, I think they had hundreds of engineers before they hired the first PM because I think the engineers were doing what they did at Snap to do the PM work. So it feels like at your company you don't operate that way. It feels like you have PMs, engineers, designers. Talk about why you decided not to approach things that way.

Gaurav Misra (00:51:48):
I do think PM is a very valuable function. I think it may be actually, and maybe I'll get roasted for this, but I think at the end of the day, not hiring PMs at Snap might've been one of those decisions where it actually succeeded despite that and because someone needs to do that work. If you don't have enough people to do it, then nobody truly owns it and then it doesn't really happen. Or if it doesn't happen, no one's responsible, which is not the right structure you want in an organization. So I think though, that being said, there was something unique to be said about what if a designer had the PM mindset.

(00:52:29):
It's actually the same idea as what if an engineer had the PM mindset and then you get even crazier. What if the PM had a design and engineering mindset? I think all we're talking about is everybody truly understanding all the functions that they're working with. Having a fundamental, broad understanding of the functions they're working with.

(00:52:48):
At Captions, we're actually going even one step further than that. Why shouldn't the PM understand marketing? I think that's actually the biggest opportunity for PMs to understand is how do we actually find the users who have this problem? I think that's a big part of solving the problem. I have a unique take on this in terms of I actually think PMs should own all the way to marketing in a way. And the reason is that if you think about marketing, it's expanding the surface area of the product, right? It's like search marketing is just placing a button to your product in Google.

(00:53:28):
Facebook ads is just placing a button to your app in Facebook. It's almost like you work at Facebook. You work at Facebook, you have a button in the app somewhere, you make a specific thing and people show up. The funnel begins there and you have all the metrics all the way from the beginning, all the way from when the user tapped on the button in Facebook and then they went down all the steps and then they landed on some onboarding screen and they did the thing, they used the application.

(00:53:56):
That's where the journey begins. And all of that is, in a way, it's a product. It's the same skillset. Understanding users from that point on is I think that's fundamental. How do we not do that today? We should be. So that's how we think about stuff. But I think the core idea is that every function should understand every other function deeply as much as possible and maybe even to the level where they can operate in that function. And that just increases the likelihood that all decisions being made in the company at the micro level will be optimized for all possible parts of the funnel that different people are essentially looking after. That's something we think about quite a bit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:44):
I completely agree with that take. It's interesting that at Airbnb, Brian was famous for changing the titles of all product managers to product marketing manager for exactly this point because he's like-

Gaurav Misra (00:54:56):
Makes sense.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:57):
... you should be doing the marketing, you shouldn't just be building the thing. And to me, I've always assumed as a PM, your job is for this thing to grow and to get adopted and be loved.

Gaurav Misra (00:55:07):
Of course.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:07):
So it's interesting people don't already think of it that way.

Gaurav Misra (00:55:10):
I agree.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:11):
But obviously, it's hard to learn the skills of being awesome and paid growth and SEO and product marketing, messaging, positioning, but I completely agree. That's such an important element of building a product. You're not just building a thing, hope it works. Goodbye. So I love that that's how you think about it. And so I guess when you hire PMs, it sounds like you look for marketing instinct and some experiences.

Gaurav Misra (00:55:31):
100%. And at least the ability and instinct to be able to learn it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:38):
Yeah. Okay, so I'm going to share one other thing that I thought as you were talking that I think is really interesting and it comes up a bunch on this podcast and this connects back to Ev and what we can learn from his success. So Patrick Olson once tweeted this tweet that has really stuck with me, which is it was around user research and the way he described it is user research isn't go to user research that informs what you build and then you build that. It's instead you do user research, it informs the mental model you have as a leader, a product builder of what your customers need and what pains they have, and you adjust that model in your head and then that's how you decide what to build. And it feels like Ev is very much that. His head was learning what people need, teens in particular, and it just worked.

Gaurav Misra (00:56:28):
Yeah, I think it's very spot on. I would say though Snap didn't like user research as a function for the longest time. I think there was one user researcher in the company until, again, 5,000 employees, the post IPO basically. But I think the people that were making a lot of the product decisions and the CEO himself, of course, were very steeped in how the user behaves and how they operate. They understood that.

(00:56:56):
I do think Snap also had a unique way of thinking about how to determine if a product is within scope or out of scope of what their mission was. And I think a lot of companies use the cyber framework and we try to as well, but essentially, the idea at the core was that they want to enable private sharing in a safe way. So I think that makes it clear that certain things just are out of scope for Snap.

(00:57:28):
It's actually one of the reasons why Snap wasn't the company to discover "short form video," TikTok style stuff because it was just against the nature of the company to even try something. It was against the mission of the company. Public sharing means possibly bullying and bad behaviors, which is exactly what Snap was trying to avoid. We don't want those behaviors to develop on the app. So for example, on Instagram stories, you can share somebody else's stories to your followers. I can take your story and share it to my followers. You can't do that on Snap.

(00:58:02):
And there was a discussion about should we do this? No, because it can enable bullying. Essentially, you're not consenting to your thing being shared to my followers and that's essentially bad. So a lot of it was done based on this type of pillar-based thinking of this is our mission, this is what we're trying to do, does it fit within or is it outside? If it's outside, we don't do it no matter what the cost of it is, no matter how exciting it is.

(00:58:30):
And even on Spotlight, the big challenge was like how do you take something like that and put that inside the Snap mission? So that was something we worked on quite a bit. Yeah, I mean I think there's tons of stories about earlier versions. I mean Snap almost had essentially what is TikTok earlier than TikTok existed and it died out because it didn't align with the mission essentially, but happy to get into it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:56):
Yeah, that actually would be really interesting, because interesting that these things are important. It's important to have these clear values in the mission of the company and to not focus on things that are outside that. And then you hear these stories of they had TikTok potentially. So yeah, whatever you can share there, that'd be awesome.

Gaurav Misra (00:59:12):
Yeah, I mean, I don't know if you remember this, but there was this product called Our Stories, and essentially it was MyStory, but it was a public story. And it started off with this idea of campus stories where you can post to your campus and other people can see it. And that actually started creating a lot of virality because essentially people would post. There was viral moments truly where people would post stuff like, "Oh, I think two people fell in love on it or something like that." Those types of things really went viral and it had really good engagement.

(00:59:47):
But at the end of the day, the problem was that we were against algorithmic essentially ranking of those types of things. So there was a curation team that was looking through every single one so that there's no negative behaviors happening essentially on the app. That was just not scalable. Even though it had really high engagement and was doing well, it just wasn't feasible to have a person looking at every single thing posted to determine whether it's appropriate or not.

(01:00:15):
It ended up dying out, but it looked like what was an early version of TikTok before it had launched. So I think in a way though it was a good thing because I think Snap does have a mission and I think it is solving a problem. I do think there is a bifurcation of social media at this point. There is what you traditionally think of as social networking where you share things with your friends. And by the way, remember the days where that used to be the way that apps would go viral. You would share things with your friends and then they would share with their friends and everybody was worried about friend sharing and how do you send to a friend and can I text message my friend or whatever.

(01:00:59):
That time is over. Virality now happens through a completely different mechanism. It happens through essentially algorithms that are deciding whether your piece of content is worth showing to an arbitrary number of people, and this is the new age of social media. It's TikTok, it's YouTube Shorts and Instagram Reels and so on. And I think actually it's changing the fundamental nature of how people interact, fundamental nature of how things go viral. And I actually think from a regulatory perspective, we should be thinking these as differently.

(01:01:37):
On one side, you have something where you're deciding who sees something and then on the other side, you have something where the company is deciding which means that it's semi curated, right? It's actually the company's voice. So yeah, I don't know, should Section 230 apply to that? I have no idea. Or maybe not. Maybe we're thinking about this the wrong way, so it should be interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:03):
Wow. All right. Well, I'm out of my depth on the legality decision, so I'm going to not follow that thread, but I imagine there's something really interesting there actually. So you've been talking about just how much things are changing and I just wanted to follow that thread and specifically, you guys are at the cutting edge of what is possible with AI video.

Gaurav Misra (01:02:25):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:25):
It feels like we're approaching and maybe we're there. This world where you have no idea if it's real or AI. I'm curious, first of all, just how far you think we are from that and second of all, the implications on the world where you can just generate any video you want.

Gaurav Misra (01:02:40):
It's fundamental. At the end of the day, a time where video images, audio can't be trusted actually hasn't existed for a while. If you think about ... I mean there was a world in the 1800s where there was no video or audio or images and everything was proven by he said, she said for the most part. And it's possible that if everything can be generated and anything can be created and it looks just as real as if it were real and there's no way to tell, then we might actually return to that world where there's no way to prove anything besides physical evidence or he said, she said.

(01:03:20):
And I think that's scary, but also possibly opens a bunch of new opportunity for someone to figure out how to solve this problem. I think it's going to be a big problem. I do think today, we are almost there in terms of creating absolutely photorealistic video. I mean the very recent models, a very cutting edge is just about ... It feels like a few centimeters away from achieving it, but I do think to fully get there to the point where it cannot be differentiated at all, it's still a couple of years away.

(01:03:52):
I also think that it is use case driven in a way. I think thinking about Captions for a second, we take a unique view on what type of video we want to focus on. Video generation and text to video generation. If you look at it today, it's all silent video. There's no audio and it's often what you think of as stop video or B-roll, right? You can actually make a movie with B-roll. And a lot of a movie or a TV show or a social media post or an ad actually is dialogue or monologue. That's actually what it is is people talking to each other, to the camera, interacting. That's actually what makes true story.

(01:04:35):
B-roll is supportive elements that are showing up to set the scene or something like maybe before the scene opens, you see a few shots of New York City or LA or something, and then you jump into the room and now two people are talking. So our goal is to solve the talking video problem. How do we create video where people are delivering dialogue or monologue or things like that? And that's what we focus on purely. And there actually isn't a lot of work happening in that area today and it's not a solved problem. We're getting there, we're getting closer and closer, but today's models actually bifurcate a little bit.

(01:05:15):
So there's a set of companies today that are able to create these types of what we're talking about is avatar videos. They're using this technology called neural rendering. It's actually not a technology that's affected by the transformer and diffusion model revolution or the large model revolution, essentially. This is a technology that existed separately and it doesn't have anything to do with the AI growth happening right now. It just happens to produce semi-realistic outputs, but it actually stops at some point because it's not clear how it becomes generalizable in every situation.

(01:05:55):
It has to be trained on people individually. So you might ingest a little bit of video of you and then you can generate you. And so it's a different technology and a different outcome, essentially. And a bunch of companies using this type of model, a bunch of companies are doing general text to video with no audio today. These are large generative models and they have the capability to do more, but that frontier just hasn't been reached yet. I think there's no doubt in anybody's mind on the research side that it is 100% solvable. It's just like somebody has to go do it and we haven't gotten there yet. Nobody has had the time to go and do that yet. So that's where we're at, essentially.

(01:06:35):
We're working purely on large generative models for talking videos. So that's our core focus. I do think though, from a safety perspective, we have a unique framework or how we think about it. So generally videos divide into two categories. So for us, we think on one side of what is documentation, so this is the type of video that it could be a personal video where you're taking a video with your friends and you're hanging out, you're at a restaurant. It's documenting what happened. You had fun, whatever it was, it's for your memories. And there's a non-personal version of this which is like, oh, it's like a reporter documenting a crime or something that happened or whatever it is and who was involved, where was it? Maybe it was a natural disaster or something, and this is for history. We want to see what happened.

(01:07:27):
And there's actually no benefit to AI-generated video in any of this. Actually, all of this, it's just negative. It's all negative. If we are generating fake versions of reality to fool people, there's just nothing good about that. And we want to stay away from that, essentially. We want to design products and build products that make it difficult to use for that particular use case, for anything that falls within that. And on the other side, you have what we think of as storytelling.

(01:07:56):
Now this could be ads, it could be social media posts, it could be TV, movies. All of these things are storytelling. They're designed for entertainment, they're designed for fun. And nobody believes if you watch a Geico commercial, you're not thinking that the gecko is real selling insurance somewhere out there. You know that this is fabricated and it's for entertainment. And same with reality TV even, right? It's called reality TV. It's definitely not reality and social media, ads, all this stuff falls in the category.

(01:08:28):
And if we can enable more people to tell stories and entertain other people and get their message out there, that is pure positive. This is where we want to focus. And a lot of our effort in the product and design process goes into how do we design products and build products that specifically make it really hard to use on one side and really easy to use on the other side. And that's the real challenge.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:53):
That's really helpful. Something that I'm really curious about as you're chatting is ByteDance just released a really amazing model. I was actually just looking at it where you put a photo in, I think, and it just creates a video of this person talking in all these different ways. Where does that fall amongst the buckets you just described?

Gaurav Misra (01:09:09):
I think that falls exactly in the area that we're in, which is talking people and that's what they're going after as well there. So that's actually one of the first examples of a large model that a larger company has released where it's able to do these dialogue or monologue videos. And I mean you yourself, you've seen it, so I'm not going to describe it too much, but as you know, it's highly expressive. It doesn't look like an avatar video. It looks like ...

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:37):
Yeah, it's wild.

Gaurav Misra (01:09:38):
And that's because of the technology that's used is fundamentally different. It's just like this is using a true large diffusion model is what they use. Whereas most companies that are working on avatar technology are actually using something pretty basic in comparison.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:53):
How long has it been since that Will Smith spaghetti video? Just to give us a reference of how fast things are moving?

Gaurav Misra (01:09:58):
Oh my god, it's been so fast, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:59):
I think it's a year.

Gaurav Misra (01:09:59):
Amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:59):
Or is it like two years?

Gaurav Misra (01:10:03):
I think it's probably about a year and a half, two years. Right?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:04):
Wow. We'll link to that video and then you could tell basically that video is the state of the art of AI video one to two years ago. And then we'll link to this other Omni something. I forget what it's called. I'm just showing what it's like today.

(01:10:18):
Geez, Louise. Okay, final question and this is around something that I know you have a really interesting insight on, which is that you see marketing using AI video basically as the final frontier of how people will experience AI is marketing, is seeing it in marketing channels. Talk about why you think that's the case and just what that looks like.

Gaurav Misra (01:10:42):
It comes back to what we were talking about before where the reality is that no matter how interesting, advanced and amazing a technology is, science fiction has become reality. We were talking about this. What was literally science fiction on TV is real now and most people still don't even know about it, to be honest.

(01:11:01):
My parents live in India and they are the only ones in the neighborhood that know about ChatGPT and they write these amazing notes to the community just with all these words. And people are just like, "How did you get so good at writing?" And they're not telling anybody, but there's still a ton of people who don't even know that these advancements have happened. And so adaption is actually much slower, even for the most exciting things. Of course, in tech circles, everybody's talking about it, but the reality is it takes a while to get out there.

(01:11:33):
And I think for companies that are going to succeed, they're going to have to figure out how to market these products so that they can be the ones to reach all these people that have the problems that they're now able to solve. And we think about that every day. So on that note, as a consumer product, we spend a bunch of time and money on marketing our products, and we often use performance channels and all kinds of things, but about a year ago, we would run AI video in ads and things like that, and we would get all these comments of people being like, "Oh my God, this is so fake. Don't show me this."

(01:12:08):
And around that time, the technology got just about good enough that suddenly, those comments stopped happening and suddenly, you could get performance that was even better than actually recording with a person because you could just try more things. You could just generate 30, 40 possibilities and one of them would win and it would win more than the one creative you can get from a person. And more interestingly, when you think about localization, you're going to go do that in every language. Once you discover winning creative, now you have to go localize that in every market and rebuild it from scratch.

(01:12:51):
It's just a ton. And oftentimes it doesn't perform as well because it's been rethought essentially. But we found that just translating it with AI was able to get performance almost as good as the original, in the original language. So this is going to fly to the entire market. I think wherever there's dollars to be made, saved, it is inevitable. It will be consumed and it will very quickly be a lot of social media.

(01:13:21):
I mean, you could imagine a social network of the future where, and this is dystopian by the way, so watch out. You could imagine a social network of the future where all content is generated. None of the people are real. I mean, the algorithm isn't tailoring whose content to show you, but it's purely generating content that is completely catered to you, with people and everything completely catered to you. I don't think it's out of the question. It almost seems inevitable in a way, but that's not too far away, I think. That's actually very possibly real in five years or something like that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:00):
What I'm imagining, because it's hard to imagine a social network where it's people because usually we want to know who these people are. I don't care random sharing status updates, but I can see a TikTok that is all AI.

Gaurav Misra (01:14:11):
Exactly, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:13):
Wow, just content tuned to your loves and interests.

Gaurav Misra (01:14:17):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:17):
And just random videos. Wow.

Gaurav Misra (01:14:21):
Yep. Because do you know, you see a TikTok feed, you don't even know who's real or not today, right? It's not like we-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:27):
Right. That's how I would approach it. I would just join TikTok and start uploading videos that are AI generated.

Gaurav Misra (01:14:32):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:33):
And then build a whole network of that. Oh my god, the future is wild.

(01:14:37):
Let's go to failure corner. Something that I try to do with this podcast is share moments where things didn't go well. There's all these stories of everything's going great all the time. All this foundries killing it, building a billion-dollar company. Oh, so awesome. But they don't know all the things that go wrong. So let me ask you, is there a story you can share of when things didn't work out? When you failed?

Gaurav Misra (01:14:59):
At the beginning of the company, we actually had a bunch of time where we spent figuring out what we wanted to do, and I think it's an unconventional story almost in a way because we started off the company, the first thing we did was build the Captions app. We launched the app. That was the first thing we did. Took two days to build it. We put it out there and it immediately took off. It was absolutely shocking because I built it on a weekend. We put it out there, I called my co-founder on Monday. I'm like, "It's at the top of the app store. We're getting like 600 videos a day."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:31):
Top of the app store, holy shit.

Gaurav Misra (01:15:33):
And we didn't do anything to enable that. It just happened on its own. It was almost anti-climactic in a way because we thought it would be a lot more time spent figuring out the product before that would happen. And so it felt like, "Wait, this can't be it, right? It can't be this fast. How did this happen?" So we got distracted because of that, because we were like, "Oh, okay. Well, maybe ... This is cool. It'll work. That's great, but we got to figure out what the product is."

(01:16:07):
And so we spent at least a year, year and a half thinking about building social networks and all kinds of things when we should have been working on Captions because there was product market fit there. And how we figured that out is Captions was sitting on my personal account, so I wasn't checking that a lot. About a year and a half into the company, as we were working on other projects and stuff, I went back to my personal account, just opened it, and I saw that there was $500,000 in there.

(01:16:38):
I looked at a chart and it was just growing. The revenue was just growing completely on its own. No employees, no releases, no bug fixes, no customer support. There was like 2,000 open support tickets that were unanswered for a year and a half, and great reviews. It's just going completely on its own. And so that was a clear sign to me. It was like, "Oh my God, you should have been working on that. That product works."

(01:17:05):
And so we immediately had a meeting. I mean, it was tough to figure out what the right path was at that point because we'd invested so much time in other things as well, but reset, and we got back on the track with Captions, and literally as soon as we started releasing the first features into it, it blew up. What looked like a vertical line at that time became a horizontal line, and the new vertical line was so vertical that the old vertical line became a horizontal line, essentially. And it's continued since then, which is crazy. So we basically wasted about a year and a half.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:42):
I love that new way of thinking about a hockey stick moment where not only is it going vertical, but the rest of the chart is now just flat along the bottom of the axis.

Gaurav Misra (01:17:49):
Exactly. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:51):
For people that may not know what Captions is, I try to describe it at the beginning and we'll link to it and stuff, but basically, the reason you thought it was nothing is it just adds captions to a video that you record.

Gaurav Misra (01:18:01):
It does.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:01):
Added captions.

Gaurav Misra (01:18:02):
Exactly, yep. So I think we wanted ... Our thought was we're going to build a social network, but first we got to build a creation tool for the social network. And we knew that we wanted to use AI to create video, and it seemed obvious that, "Oh, speech to text, a solved problem, we should start with that." So that's why we decided to start with Captions because it was a solved problem at the time. What was funny is that once GPT and stuff started coming out, a lot of the things that were unsolved became solved very quickly. So timing was almost perfect.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:37):
And that aligns to something you shared earlier. Just so many of these problems that were not yet solved are now possible, and the companies that are in the right place at the right time benefit greatly who've been just waiting for this part.

(01:18:50):
The other thing that I think is interesting about that story is you try to build a social network. I think it was around high schools and things like that. As we've seen, it's very difficult to build a new social network. So let me just get your sense. Do you think it's possible for somebody to come around and build a new, the next Facebook, the next Snap, the next whatever?

Gaurav Misra (01:19:09):
I think it's definitely possible. I do think ... Let me tell you something crazy, actually. The social network that we had at the time, we actually remove it from the app store, so it's not available anymore. But til today, there are people, there are thousands of people that are using it, posting on it, and all the different things, which actually speaks to the power of the social network in a way. It is hard to create and hard to kill. I mean, I think X is actually a great example of that too. A lot of movement happened there and it continues to work, I guess somehow. So testament to that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:49):
The power of network effects, especially someone once described this so well, they're like Twitter/X. They changed the brand, they changed the team building it. They changed the URL. Like everything changed about it except the network effect of the people in it.

Gaurav Misra (01:20:07):
It's true. It's true.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:09):
I just saw a story that they're making billions of dollars. He's actually turned it around. It's actually becoming a really profitable company.

Gaurav Misra (01:20:16):
Wow.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:17):
Yeah. It just came out the other day. So Elon did it. Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Gaurav Misra (01:20:25):
I'm ready. Let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:27):
What are two or three books that you have recommended most to other people?

Gaurav Misra (01:20:32):
I have to say here that I actually don't read books. It's actually something that I decided on purpose where I decided I don't want to build my skill in reading, and I want to build it in listening and watching instead, because I think that's the future.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:49):
I love how intentional that is, and I love how it's a really cool way of saying, I don't read books. The future isn't reading, but I love that you have books behind you, so [inaudible 01:20:58].

Gaurav Misra (01:20:58):
I do. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:59):
[inaudible 01:20:59]

Gaurav Misra (01:21:00):
[inaudible 01:21:00] didn't read, they're back there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:03):
That's funny. Okay, cool. I want to ask more questions, but I'm going to keep going. Lightning around. Speaking of watching and listening, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Gaurav Misra (01:21:12):
I like Silo and Severance. I mean, obviously, I think everyone's watching these. There's a book around Silo too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:18):
I read that. I read all of them. There's three of them.

Gaurav Misra (01:21:20):
There are.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:20):
It sucks to watch the show because you know all the tricks that are about to happen, and I'm just like, "Why am I watching this? I know where this will go.

Gaurav Misra (01:21:27):
Yeah. I mean, for what it's worth, it does seem like the show is going on a slightly different path.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:31):
It is. That was also what annoyed me. Just like, "What the heck? This is made up. All is made up shit." I don't like that when I watch the show. So two reasons I'm not watching it but [inaudible 01:21:40].

Gaurav Misra (01:21:39):
Don't worry about it. I didn't actually read the book. My wife read the book and then she told me the story.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:44):
Okay, okay. I was worried. I was worried. Okay, cool, and Severance. Okay, great. I love Severance.

(01:21:51):
Next question. Do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Gaurav Misra (01:21:55):
My favorite product, honestly, is Linear. I'm not going to lie, just because it's so well-designed and it's so easy to use. I also like Superhuman. I mean, these are obvious answers, but I do use these things every day and it's hard to create products that you use every day and don't hate. So props for them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:13):
Cool. I haven't announced this on the podcast yet, but this is a good time, whoever's listening right now, is I just launched a bundle where if you become a paid subscriber to my newsletter, you get, listen to this, a year free of Linear and Superhuman and Notion and Granola, which is incredible AI app for note-taking and Perplexity, Perplexity Pro.

Gaurav Misra (01:22:35):
Ooh. Nice.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:36):
$2,000 in value for the price of my newsletter, 200 bucks, going to that.

Gaurav Misra (01:22:40):
Damn, that's real value.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:43):
It's an unbelievable deal, and it's a no-brainer at this point to buy a subscription, but this isn't an ad for my newsletter. I'll keep going.

(01:22:50):
Next question. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often find yourself coming back to, sharing with friends and family in work or in life?

Gaurav Misra (01:22:57):
I actually learned this because someone else told me that I keep repeating this thing, but I have this framework of how I want to operate at work, basically. Right? I think I love to compete and to win at the end of the day. And I think that to win, you have to be the best. But I also think the easiest way to be the best is to be the first, and that actually is key.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:25):
And so is the motto the easiest way? Is that the-

Gaurav Misra (01:23:27):
That's it. The easiest way to be the best is to be first.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:31):
Be the first. Interesting. Okay. I have to resist following threads here because I want to make this lightning round.

(01:23:37):
Okay. Final question, just for fun. What's the coolest, most wild AI video you've seen recently? Is there one that comes to mind of like, "Wow, that was something"?

Gaurav Misra (01:23:47):
I mean, honestly, I got to say the OmniHuman stuff was pretty cool.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:52):
The ByteDance video that we talked about.

Gaurav Misra (01:23:52):
Yeah, exactly. I mean, the broccoli talking. I don't know if you saw that one. There was a little broccoli delivering a little speech.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:01):
Interesting.

Gaurav Misra (01:24:03):
Yeah, it looked like it was animated by an animator.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:08):
Just imagine being a kid these days and just seeing stuff like that.

Gaurav Misra (01:24:11):
I think you're probably just used to it, right? You're just like, this is just normal.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:13):
Mm-hmm. It's just like we were saying, AGI is just going to come around.

Gaurav Misra (01:24:17):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:17):
All right. Cool. What's for dinner? Cool. That's great.

Gaurav Misra (01:24:20):
Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:20):
Amazing. Gaurav, this was incredible. It was so insightful on so many levels. Two final questions. Where can folks find you and what you're building if they want to learn more? And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Gaurav Misra (01:24:30):
Awesome. Yeah, I mean, definitely find me on LinkedIn. That's where I live most of the time. My DMs are open, et cetera, et cetera. So feel free to send me a message. And I think what'll be useful, I mean, we're building out our early product and design team, so if AI video is interesting, if consumer apps are interesting, now's the time to join. We're really small, early, we work together across the team, so there's going to be no better time to join, basically.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:01):
And you get to ship a marketable feature every week.

Gaurav Misra (01:25:03):
Exactly. I mean, that's the PM's dream. Think about it. Right?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:06):
The PM's dream. Yeah, I like that that's a filter. The people that get excited about that, great fit. The people that are stressed out by that, not the place to be.

Gaurav Misra (01:25:15):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:17):
So awesome. All right. Gaurav, thank you so much for being here.

Gaurav Misra (01:25:20):
No, thank you. Appreciate it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:22):
Bye everyone.

(01:25:25):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Gina Gotthilf (00:00:00):
Communication is constantly underrated.

(00:00:02):
And communication isn't about being able to convey a message, it's about being able to convey a message in a way that the listener receives it, and understands it, and remembers it. And that's really hard to do.

(00:00:13):
One of the things I've helped employ at Duolingo that I think is still there today, it's definitely not just me, it was an amazing team, is a unique voice. And what that means is not just another language learning app where we give you instructions and you follow directions.

(00:00:25):
There is always a quirk, like it's unexpected. The way we talk to you is a little bit funny. It doesn't take ourselves too, seriously and it makes the person receiving this message feel something. Again, it's about how you make people feel. And you feel like either you giggle, or you're like, wait what? They just did what? And using that to your benefit.

Lenny (00:00:48):
Today my guest is Gina Gotthilf. Gina is most known for leading growth and marketing at Duolingo, helping take them from 3 million to over 200 million users, primarily through organic and non-paid growth channels, which we explore in depth.

(00:01:01):
She also worked on the Mike Bloomberg presidential campaign, where she oversaw a historic digital ad budget, and she shares learnings from that experience. She also led growth in community for Tumblr in Latin America.

(00:01:12):
Currently, she's the co-founder and COO of Latitude, which is a company dedicated to helping build the next generation of iconic tech startups in Latin America. In our wide-ranging conversation, Gina shares a ton of new insights and tactics on how Duolingo grew early on, how they grow today, and most interestingly, what they did to become one of the very rare successful consumer subscription businesses.

(00:01:35):
We also talk about how every life and career has an A-side and A B-side. Also, why PR and brand are way underappreciated by most startups. She shares a bunch of stories of failed experiments, and also some of her biggest wins. Also, why Latin America is so interesting right now as a hub for startups and for innovation. Also, there's a bit of philosophy sprinkled in, and a bunch of real talk.

(00:01:58):
This was such a fun conversation. Gina is delightful. I am excited for you to learn from her. With that, I bring you Gina God Gotthilf, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:09):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes the day-to-Day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates, and you're spending your days basically putting out fires.

(00:02:26):
A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and road-mapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian.

(00:02:36):
With Jira product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place, and prioritize confidently, finally replacing those endless spreadsheets. Create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds. And it's all built on Jira, where your engineering team's already working, so true collaboration is finally possible.

(00:02:56):
Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers. Sales, support, leadership, even Greg from finance, anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free. No catch. And it's only $10 a month for you.

(00:03:12):
Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never-ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over. Rediscover what's possible with Jira Product Discovery. Try it for free at atlassian.com/lenny. That's atlassian.com/lenny.

(00:03:29):
This episode is brought to you by Hex. If you're a data person, you probably have to jump between different tools to run queries, build visualizations, write Python, and send around a lot of screenshots and CSV files.

(00:03:42):
Hex brings everything together. Its powerful Notebook UI lets you analyze data in SQL, Python, or no-code in any combination and work together with live multiplayer and version control.

(00:03:54):
And now Hex's AI tools can generate queries and code, create visualizations, and even kickstart a whole analysis for you, all from natural language prompts. It's like having an analytics copilot built right into where you're already doing your work.

(00:04:07):
Then, when you're ready to share, you can use he's drag and drop app builder to configure beautiful reports or dashboards that anyone can use. Join the hundreds of data teams like Notion, All Trails, Loom, Mixpanel, and Algolia using Hex every day to make their work more impactful. Sign up today at hex.tech/lenny to get a 60-day free trial of the Hex team plan. That's hex.tech/ lenny.

(00:04:34):
Gina, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Gina Gotthilf (00:04:39):
Lenny, I'm so excited to be here. It's been awesome to see how you've built this, and just how far it's gone. Thank you for inviting me.

Lenny (00:04:47):
Really appreciate that. I'm more excited to have you on the podcast. And I know you just came off hosting a massive event somewhere in Latin America, I think you had 5,000-something people. You had Ben Horowitz keynoting.

(00:04:59):
And I wanted to start with the talk you gave. I think you described it as people having this A-side and B-side to their life, kind of like a record as an A-side and B-side. So could you just share what it was this conference? And then two, kind of just briefly share this concept as much as you can

Gina Gotthilf (00:05:17):
For sure, and thanks for that Lenny.

(00:05:18):
Look, I think for those of us here in the US, I became an American last year. I love the US. I've been here for 19 years. It's hard to imagine just how much is going on south of the border. There's actually 660 million people living across Latin America, and it's an economy of $6 trillion.

(00:05:36):
And Brazil is a huge market, just in terms of sheer size, over 200 million people. And also in terms of where the ecosystem is. I am Brazilian, so I am Latin American, even though sometimes Brazilians are not sure if they are Latin American because we speak Portuguese.

(00:05:52):
And so the future of the region really matters to me. And helping people get the opportunities that I've had, in terms of access to information and resources that could help them build scalable, very successful startups, can really change the economy across the board. I believe in that much more than I believe in government, and whether we're going to vote this guy or that guy next.

(00:06:14):
And so that's sort of the impetus for the company. The conference was a conference put together by my company. I'm a co-founder. We're three, Brian, Yuri, and I. We put this conference together to bring together the top entrepreneurs, operators and investors across Latin America, but also people who are interested in investing in the region, of which there are more and more here in the US and abroad.

(00:06:34):
More than 5,000 people came. We had over 70 speakers. It was across two days. We had amazing people like Ben Horowitz, who never gave a talk, or did a fireside specifically for and about Latin America and the opportunity. But we also had incredible founders who you, in terms of US operators, may not be as familiar with.

(00:06:54):
But if you've ever heard of Rappi, it's a really important delivery company in Latin America. So the founder of Rappi flew down from Miami for that. And then we had VCs from a lot of the top names that you've heard here in the region as well. And then a lot of unicorns. We've had a lot of unicorns in the region.

(00:07:09):
So they were all there. And the idea was to share learnings along the way, successes and failures, so that people can skip by not making the same mistakes as others. And I was asked to open both days. And then the first day, the opening talk that I ended up giving was this concept that I really like, which is the A-side and the B-side of a story. Which is that if you are old like me, and maybe you Lenny, I think we're similar age, you remember what a CD or what a mixtape was like. And we had the A and the B-side.

(00:07:41):
We are very encouraged in our lives, especially professionally, to talk about our A-sides all the time. Because that's what impresses people, that's what opens doors, that's what allows us to keep growing and it's so important. It means that a lot of what you hear in podcasts and on stage ends up being the Instagramable version of someone, or a company, or a country's trajectory. It's just the highlights.

(00:08:06):
And when I talk about my A-side, it's very impressive. I did things like we'll talk about, I met President Obama, I worked on the Mike Bloomberg presidential campaign. I helped Duolingo scale from three to 200 million users. I worked with Tumblr, helping them scale in Latin America. Andreessen Horowitz invested in my company, et cetera.

(00:08:22):
But between all of those highlights, there were so many B-moments that get shoved under the rug because it's just easier for me and it's more impressive for others. But I really like to highlight those. Because I think that most of us have a lot of B-moments every day, every week, every month and every period of our lives. And it's easy to think that things aren't just not going to work out for us because we're in one of those B-moments, if we don't recognize them as moments.

(00:08:47):
And the story I ended up telling was how, much I have these A and B-sides that I don't talk about my B-side so much. Latin America also has A and B-sides. Because it's really easy to focus on, it's dangerous, we're behind the governments are a mess. There's financial insecurity.

(00:09:04):
But there's a lot of A side in there, and a lot of the A-side is the opportunity we have in terms of tech. Because in terms of percentage of GDP that tech occupies compared to other markets, it's very promising. We're at one third of India, one 10th of China, one 30th of the United States. Meaning that tech companies can grow a lot so that they occupy that space in terms of the GDP, which is believable. So that was the concept of the talk and the reason for this conference.

Lenny (00:09:34):
I love this concept. We're going to talk, as you expected about a lot of your A-side stuff. Is there any example of a B-side story of your life that would be interesting to share?

Gina Gotthilf (00:09:44):
Look, I think those are the most interesting, because they're funny or ridiculous. But I'll just say that I had a lot of B-sides and I still do. For example, I had no idea what I wanted to do. I actually, I thought I wanted to be an actress. I either wanted to be that person in SeaWorld who goes like this with a dolphin, this was before SeaWorld was canceled. Or I wanted to be an actress. But then my parents convinced me that I was probably not going to succeed because the odds weren't in my favor.

(00:10:13):
I applied to schools. I didn't get into any Ivy League, I didn't get into any of the top schools I wanted to go to. When I got to college, I actually ended up dropping out because I got so depressed, incredibly depressed. Couldn't get out of bed, depressed.

(00:10:26):
Ironically, I dropped out of Reed College, which is the same college that Steve Jobs dropped out of. So I was just destined for greatness. I knew it at that moment.

Lenny (00:10:35):
It all makes sense looking backwards, as he said.

Gina Gotthilf (00:10:37):
Totally. I was dropping out, being like, yes, this is exactly the path. No, I was miserable. I thought there was no path forward.

(00:10:44):
And when I finally went back and graduated, the college counselor looked at my curriculum and said, "What have you even done with your life? There's nothing to show for." And it was shocking. Because I was always the overachiever who wanted to do the maximum curriculum, and ace all of my classes, and do whatever. I did three diplomas in high school, the international, the American, the Brazilian. My one learning there that has stuck with me, and I think can work for other people too, is that it's not just about doing things that actually matter, and learning. It's about being able to tell the story, and it's about understanding what other people perceive as valuable.

(00:11:22):
I'm not talking about net value. But I'm talking about, if you want to grow in the world, it's understanding that psychology of how humans react to what you're showing them. So that was one lesson.

(00:11:32):
But then I went on to, I applied to a hundred companies. I didn't hear back from most of them. I finally got an internship at kind of like a tier B-slash-C digital marketing agency in New York City, because I wanted to live in New York so badly. And they forgot to apply for my visa on time, so I lost my visa and had to go back to Brazil.

(00:11:53):
And then I ended up leaving that organization to go work for another one. And I won't even go into the details of the shadiness of that company that I worked for, but then they ended up laying me off. So I lost my visa again, had to go back home. Found another opportunity, got fired that time. So there was just a lot of rockiness in my start that I don't think you would imagine when you see someone up on stage leading a conference for 5,000 people. That, I think, is important.

(00:12:19):
And even when I started working for Tumblr, I was like, this is it. I made it. This is a really interesting company. This is going to work out. That was super rocky because it was an early stage startup. So for example, they couldn't figure out how to wire money to Brazil. So I was not paid for six months. And at one point me and my colleagues were trying to get money out of the teller to pay contractors, because we had no money to pay them. And we borrowed money from people. And finally they also laid me off because they decided to sell to Yahoo.

(00:12:47):
And then I had to figure out, what am I going to do? No one's going to hire me. I've been fired and laid off so many times. This is all before I started an agency to help US-based tech companies and startups grow in Latin America, because I figured I was in this really great place to make that happen.

(00:13:02):
And it eventually worked for, well-known companies such as Duolingo. At the time, they weren't well known. They were a tiny little startup. They didn't have an Android app. And that's how I started working with Duolingo. Because their head of marketing connected with someone they had worked with at Flickr and said, "I noticed Tumblr grew a lot in Brazil last year. Can you recommend a company or an agency to help?" And they said, this girl. And I was 26.

(00:13:26):
And so that's how they connected me with Duolingo, and I started helping them grow in Brazil as a consultant. They were like, this is great. Can you help us grow in Chile, Argentina? And I was like, yes.

(00:13:35):
They were like, how about Mexico? And I was like, yes. Did I know anything about these places, Lenny? Did I know people there? No, but you can figure it out.

(00:13:44):
And then they ended up asking me to come on full-time, do that across the world. In Japan, China, Korea, Turkey, Spain, France, et cetera. And then to own growth, which ended up meaning communications, social media, government partnerships, anything to grow.

(00:13:58):
And then eventually became an AB testing growth engine with engineers, and PMs, and designers of which I knew nothing about. And even after that, I left Duolingo five years later, didn't know what to do with my life. You'd think, oh wow, you have it figured out now. You left Duolingo, you have the world in front of you.

(00:14:18):
And I'm like, maybe I can finally go work for nonprofits, which is what I actually wanted to do in the first place. Tried my hand at that, had a couple of experiences before going to work for the Mike Bloomberg campaign.

(00:14:29):
Working for the Mike Bloomberg campaign is impressive, but you know what? Mike Bloomberg didn't win. He's not the president. So that was not a successful campaign, if you really look at it. And yeah, latitude seems like it's a really promising path. But there's A days and B days.

(00:14:46):
So it's just a lot of that, and just staying resilient, and believing in yourself, and getting back on the horse when you fall on your face.

Lenny (00:14:53):
Amazing. That's such an important message. I think one of the threads from what you're describing, something that I think about a lot, is people kind of underestimate how long their career is. There's just so much time to do stuff, and for things to start to work.

(00:15:05):
This is going to sound really fancy, but I think Marcus Aurelius has this quote about how our life is actually very long, we just use it really badly. And we just waste a lot of our time.

Gina Gotthilf (00:15:14):
Wow. I think you're so right, Lenny and I love that. Because people are going around being like, life is short, life is short. But that's so true. We waste so much time. But also I think we don't recognize how much opportunity we have in front of us. And as a 26-year-old, I definitely thought my career was over. I was like, I blew it. And looking back, it's funny.

Lenny (00:15:33):
Yeah, I know exactly what you mean. I spent nine years at my first job, at a random company in San Diego in a startup. And I was like, what am I doing here so long? And it turned out that was really useful for the thing I did next. And then eventually, wow, things started to really take off.

(00:15:48):
So I think that's a really good lesson for people, just for a long time. This is my fourth career. I've switched careers many times. I was an engineer, then I was a founder, then I was a product manager. And now I'm whatever this is, whatever you call this thing.

Gina Gotthilf (00:16:01):
Okay, cool.

Lenny (00:16:03):
Yeah.

Gina Gotthilf (00:16:03):
I guess me too. I was an operator. I was a consultant. Well, I was an employee, I was a consultant. Then I was an operator, which is a fancy way to say employee at a startup. And then, now I'm a founder and a VC. And an angel, and whatever this is.

Lenny (00:16:20):
Awesome, awesome. So I think that's a really important takeaway. Just, there's a lot of time to do stuff. And don't stress if things aren't moving as fast as you want.

(00:16:28):
I want to try to bounce around between A side and B side in this conversation, that'd be a cool framework. And so we're going to definitely talk about Duolingo, and a little bit more about Latin America.

(00:16:36):
I wanted to touch on this Mike Bloomberg story. So what I understand from your experience there is, you deployed a historic amount of money into paid ads as a part of that campaign. I am just curious what you learned from running paid ads at that scale for a campaign or just broadly.

Gina Gotthilf (00:16:53):
So we deployed historic amounts of money in the campaign. It wasn't me, Gina, personally.

Lenny (00:17:02):
It wasn't just you spending that money, yeah.

Gina Gotthilf (00:17:03):
I think that's important to share. So my Bloomberg presidential campaign was spending roughly a million dollars a day. Which is crazy. And you can do a lot with a million dollars a day.

Lenny (00:17:11):
It's good to be Google.

Gina Gotthilf (00:17:12):
It's good to be Google. But yes, it's good to be Facebook. I'll share what I think is most useful here, and also what my experience ended up being.

(00:17:22):
Which is, they brought together a lot of great talent from across the US, especially in terms of tech. This is an organization called Hawk Fish, that they started working with the Mike Bloomberg. Basically, he created it. I don't know, it was embedded in there.

(00:17:37):
There were a lot of us who had large eagles, and had been sharks in our previous organizations, who had to figure out how to come together and work and in a very short amount of time. That was a very interesting experience, because it's hard to do that. It's not just important to be great and smart, but it's also important to understand how to most effectively deploy your resources and talent across an organization.

(00:18:02):
And that sort of takes a little bit of time to happen. And for a presidential campaign, I find that very hard to do, from that one experience. That said, it also meant that when you're looking at the paid ads, and the fact that we were deploying this massive amount of money, there were a lot of cooks in the kitchen when it came to figuring out exactly what we were going to do with those ads.

(00:18:23):
And how we were going to target them, and what are the campaigns we're going to run, and what's the copy, and what's the design? And after maybe a few days there, I realized that my best bet in terms of actually adding value was not to be another cook in the kitchen trying to figure that out, but to move into the next step of the journey, which nobody was paying attention to.

(00:18:45):
Which is, once you click on an ad, you land somewhere. And then whatever happens there is super important. Because if people then take the action you want them to take on that landing page, or don't, is definitive. But everyone spends all of their effort and money on the ads. And I think that this is true of almost everything. We forget to think about the step-by-step in growth, and what that experience looks like. And even just the second or third screen in an experience are as, if not more, important than the first one. Because that's where your "leaky buckets" can happen.

(00:19:17):
So if you're able to 2X the effectiveness of a landing page, you are able to actually, in a compounded way, increase the effectiveness of that first ad. So I spent a lot of time going rogue and figuring out how to make landing pages. Because the designers and the copywriters were all allocated to the actual ad.

(00:19:36):
So I was just there being like, I'm going to do copywriting and design, and figure out how we can increase these conversion rates. And the cool thing about that level of dollar deployment is that you're able to reach statistical significance very quickly.

(00:19:50):
Whereas in a company like Duolingo, where you already have a lot of users and you can reach statistical significance on an AB test within two weeks, at the Mike Bloomberg presidential campaign on a landing page, we could see that three times a day, so four times a day.

(00:20:04):
So I would be able to do something and be like, oh wow, this has a 3% conversion rate. And then get approval for a new version and deploy it and then be like, okay, we're at 6% now. And then actually improve. There was one day where I brought one page from three to 12% conversion rate with statistical significance. So that's, I think, the biggest benefit of having those dollar amounts.

(00:20:25):
I think the drawback, and that's the same for startups that have a lot of money to spend, is you start going a little wild in terms of like, oh, the world's our oyster. We can do whatever we want. And you lose sight a little bit about effectiveness, which is where growth is so magical.

Lenny (00:20:40):
What was that change on the landing page you did that increased conversion so much, do you remember?

Gina Gotthilf (00:20:44):
None of this is going to blow anyone's minds, I think, because it's very best practices. But it's easy to overlook when you're so focused on so many different steps of a process. The first one is making it mobile-optimized.

(00:20:56):
People who are working, are working on their computers, on desktop computers, even today. We forget that most people are looking at pages on our phones. And that has been the case for a while, and I think it's just increasing. So you need to make sure that that experience of looking at something on your phone, whatever your phone is, is great.

(00:21:11):
And what that means is from a landing page perspective, super simple. First, the core copy, the message and button need to be above the fold. Or, if you're not going to keep the button above the fold, which I still recommend, but if you're not going to do that for whatever reason, then you need to have a very clear indicator that there's something to scroll towards on your page.

(00:21:35):
The second thing, applies to both desktop and mobile, is people skim. And copywriters don't like to believe that, much like journalists don't like to believe that people just read headlines. It's just how it is. People are busy and lazy, myself included.

(00:21:47):
So you can write all of this beautiful messaging that you've thought through, but if people are not going to read it, it doesn't matter. So you have to approach a landing page with that perspective in as much as possible.

(00:21:58):
And so for me, what makes something particularly skimmable is first restricting copy a lot. And even copy that seems short is probably not short enough. Second, so people normally like to have a title, some sort of subtitle, and then an image and a button. Those are kind of core pieces of some sort of landing page experience. Having the title and the button speak to each other is really cool. Because if people only read the title and the button, they got it.

(00:22:24):
It can't be like, "Wouldn't you like the next President of the United States to blah blah blah?" And then a whole explanation of what. And then the button is like, I don't know, apply. Whatever, right? It's like, apply for what? Now I have to go read the thing and I didn't get it.

(00:22:36):
So just keeping those two things super speaking to each other. And then of course, making sure that that landing page speaks to the ad experience. And that's something that I think people do pay some attention to.

(00:22:47):
Finally, there's an element of emotion to it. Which I didn't get super deep in, but just very basic. My job was to create a landing page that made people ... So it was actually, funnily enough, before Covid hit the US. And then Covid hit the US. Half the people in the campaign got Covid on our sad goodbye Mike Bloomberg party. And I had already bounced, and I left New York. I was scared. I was like, the city's going to be a Petri dish.

(00:23:13):
And I spent months trying to convince the whole United States, as much as I could, that Covid was going to hit the United States. And there were going to be a lot of deaths unless we had a different president. And so I, of course, convinced myself very effectively that we were in grave danger.

(00:23:28):
And so to do that, we had images in the background of different sorts, Mike Bloomberg and whatever. But fear really inspires people, and that's just a truth about human psychology. Especially when it comes to a presidential campaign.

(00:23:43):
So having dark colors like black, having Trump in sort of a black scenario, kind of looking down and looking a little menacing is more powerful than having Trump looking ridiculous, for example. In the context of, we need to take action, otherwise there will be deaths because of this.

(00:24:02):
So it depends on the concept, but don't underplay the importance of understanding how people are going to feel when they see something, and whether that's going to lead them to take action. Keeping it super, super simple.

(00:24:13):
Because also the other thing I see is a lot of images. It is like, no, the image can't distract from your core message. It has to be a background thing that aids in the digestion of that message.

Lenny (00:24:22):
I feel like all these startups are going to start adding Trump, menacing Trump to their landing pages because they worked for you guys.

Gina Gotthilf (00:24:31):
Well, they're going to alienate 50% of the American population.

Lenny (00:24:34):
True. There's a few other things I wanted to dig into. One is obviously Duolingo, so let's just spend some time here.

(00:24:40):
So it's really interesting. With my newsletter, I've written over 200 posts. The number one, most popular post of all time, did not expect this, was about the story of Duolingo. And the way that the team reignited growth after it started to plateau.

(00:24:55):
This was by Jorge Mazal.

Gina Gotthilf (00:24:55):
Mazal.

Lenny (00:24:56):
Mazal, okay, cool.

Gina Gotthilf (00:24:59):
Jorge Mazal, yes.

Lenny (00:25:00):
Okay, there's the right pronunciation. And so...

Lenny (00:25:01):
There's the right pronunciation. And so clearly, there's a lot of interest in the Duolingo story. And you were there before Jorge. You were there really early. I think you were there from 3 million users to 200 million. That's what I hear you describe it as.

Gina Gotthilf (00:25:16):
That's right. That's my claim to fame.

Lenny (00:25:18):
Great. That's a large growth trajectory. So one thing I wanted to ask broadly is it feels like B to C subscription apps never work. They never last. There's so few success stories of consumer subscription apps. There's Duolingo there, Calm maybe, but I don't know, it feels like it's slowing down, Headspace, Grammarly. And there's a few that are okay, but most die. I guess I'm mostly curious, what is it that you think Duolingo did right to make it basically and continue to thrive, even these days?

Gina Gotthilf (00:25:56):
Very few people really believed that we were going to make it, not surprisingly. Even though we had this amazing team, et cetera, now it looks almost obvious, it's like B to C language learning just seems so niche. And plus education, there's no money in education. It's been stuck for so long. And what I kept hearing, "You guys, did you hear about Rosetta Stone? This solution already exists." So I think that there are a couple of things that really made Duolingo's success, which are very hard to replicate.

(00:26:25):
Number one, an obsession for the mission. That sounds cliche. I think a lot of founders and startup people like to talk about the mission, and I get it, and I think it's real. But I really mean it, because this obsession for solving a problem for hundreds of millions of people, and the problem wasn't just a vitamin. It was a problem in the sense that if you don't know English in today's world, your opportunities to get out of your socioeconomic zone are very diminished. More specifically, you can double or triple your income potential by learning English in a developing market like Latin America. And there are lots of those around the world. That belief that education should be free and that people should have access to that opportunity, not just in developing countries, but of course, also in the US really drove the organization in a way that drove how we built our marketing, how we spoke to our users, how we designed the experience, how we put barriers in front of taking decisions that would actually impact that mission. It helped our users rally around the business. It helped us hire the best people even if we were based in Pittsburgh and couldn't necessarily pay the Google dollars. So it's really hard to measure the importance of just really being obsessed about that mission. But I speak to a lot of education founders, ed tech founders, and I am very biased probably because of this experience. I will say that I had one of those, what's it called, the experiment where they looked at all of the shots that some plane got when it came back from war and then started fixing the plane. There's a name for this. And then they realized that-

Lenny (00:28:04):
I forget the name, but it's the pictures. The pictures are famous with the red dots.

Gina Gotthilf (00:28:06):
You shouldn't fix those spots because if they got back, they survived, they were missing the plane that fell. So I got to ride in a plane that survived. So I have, oh, it's called survivor bias, maybe?

Lenny (00:28:18):
That sounds right.

Gina Gotthilf (00:28:19):
I have survivor bias, but I really believe in this-

Lenny (00:28:19):
Survivorship bias.

Gina Gotthilf (00:28:22):
Survivorship bias. So if I speak to a founder and I can tell that they're building an ed tech because they believe that they will be able to make money from it, there's nothing wrong with making money, nothing. I want to make money. I think it's a capitalist world that we live in, and it's fine, but just that drive is what brings people to you, and it's what leads you to make long-term thinking decisions that really end up mattering. And it's what allowed us in many ways to grow organically versus with paid ads, which I think is crucial for an early stage tech startup. It's not the only thing, but I think it's one of them that's super important.

Lenny (00:28:59):
Just to follow that thread, that's something that I actually found. I wrote a post about this looking into of the ones that made it, what did they do consistently across them all? And one is just stay very lean and scrappy for a long time. Because to your point, it's so hard to build a big business, and you can't afford, like you said, the best people, you can't pay them as much as everyone else. So essentially it's just a long time of just being very lean and scrappy. That was the most consistent pattern across all these B to C subscription apps.

Gina Gotthilf (00:29:27):
Agree. And that's number two. When I was hired by Duolingo as a consultant and as an employee, my mandate was make Duolingo grow. Here is no budget. I had no budget. And people are shocked. They're like, "Oh, but when did you turn on the ads?" We're like, "We just didn't." Because I know this is between you and me, Lenny, I actually am quite bad at paid ads. It's just not a muscle that I ever developed.

Lenny (00:29:48):
We won't tell anyone.

Gina Gotthilf (00:29:49):
I'm only good at ... huh?

Lenny (00:29:51):
We won't tell anyone.

Gina Gotthilf (00:29:54):
Please keep this a secret. I think I could develop that muscle if one day I need it, but I'm particularly good at thinking about organic growth because I've had to, because that's what Tumblr and Duolingo required of me. And the logic behind it was, listen, with Duolingo, we started monetizing the platform very late, and it was a luxury because we had so much venture capital money to sustain us for a while. But we had some bets that we made in the early days that we thought were going to help really sustain the company, like translations that didn't end up panning out. And then the Duolingo English test that we started developing really early with Burr Settles, an amazing guy who basically was developing this test, we realized that was going to be super long-term. We didn't start really charging for subscriptions or having ads until, I don't know exactly, but something like year three.

(00:30:47):
So we didn't have an LTV, which meant that having a CAC made no sense. So that's number one. You need that CAC-to-LTV ratio that everyone talks about. That's an important thing. But it's more than that. First, I think there's the CAC-to-LTV ratio thing. The second thing is that even if you have a low CAC, I was just talking to an entrepreneur this morning, he was like, "Oh, we were able to hit a 10-cent CAC." And I'm like, "Yeah, but that grows." As you start targeting more people, the low hanging fruit dry out, and you end up having to pay more money. And then once you have those users coming in because of those paid ads, you can't cut it off because you still need that growth, because you're trying to prove to your investors that you're growing, or you need those users in order to continue AB testing or whatever. Then you become completely dependent, and it's really hard to turn it off. So it's almost like an addiction, that as much as you're able to limit in the beginning, the better.

(00:31:38):
And the third thing is that I really believe that ... I don't believe. I think we all know at this point that the most important thing for the growth of anything tech, maybe in general, is retention. Of course, you need acquisition, but retention is important. And I simplify it a little bit because retention, I don't think of it in terms of like, wow, I must retain this user. It's like, is this thing valuable or not? That's what retention is to me. Either it's actually providing real value or it's not. If it's providing real value, people stick around. It's as simple as that.

(00:32:11):
And if you don't force yourself to pay attention to retention and finding the users to whom this is the most useful really early on, you risk convincing yourself of metrics and glossing over some of this other important stuff, which means that even if you succeed at acquisition, you're just not going to succeed long-term because those users fall through. And you won't really understand why because you were building retention based on acquired users that weren't the ones who weren't necessarily going to ... And I don't mean to say that I don't believe in paid at all. I think paid has its value, I think especially when it comes to testing. Sometimes you don't have as many users as you need to run statistically significant tests. But with paid users you could, or you could just use paid ads to understand messaging and images and even value prop. On a landing page, that's super valuable. Or you find an amazing niche, and you know exactly who your target users are, and you figure out a way that makes sense. But then again, I would argue that if you found your perfect user and where they are, you should go figure out a way to get them organically, because if you can really provide them value, they would come and they would stay.

Lenny (00:33:16):
So far I've heard be really focused around a mission and be very clear about what you're trying to achieve. Two is just very low spend, essentially don't expect to grow this into venture scale business. Focus on a sustainable profitable business for as long as you can and constrain your spend basically. And then third is this focus on retention, which I think is a really important point. And this is true for any app you're building, but I think especially true for consumer business where people are just like, "Nah, this is cool. Okay, what's next? Okay, let's check out Snapchat."

Gina Gotthilf (00:33:47):
Totally. And I was going to have a different three, but I think it's related, so maybe we can add it as three B or four.

Lenny (00:33:54):
Three B. Let's do it.

Gina Gotthilf (00:33:56):
An obsession for the product. Again, sounds obvious but isn't. When we look back to products that existed before the internet, before the app store, you built this thing, you made it, and then you tried to convince people to buy it. That was it. So look, I made a chair, this is a beautiful chair. And then you spend all this money trying to get it out into the world, and people buy the chair. And you hire all these salespeople, and you hire an amazing marketing agency, and you try to sell the chair. It's no longer at all that because products are constantly in motion and evolving. And unless you're able to own that data and understand what it can tell you, you're never going to win.

(00:34:33):
So I hear a lot of people come to me and say, "Gina, Gina, we built Duolingo for this." And I'm like, "Okay, cool." And then they show it to me, and it looks exactly like Duolingo. And I'm like, "Okay, cool." And then I'm like, "How did you get to this design?" They're like, "Oh yeah, we used Duolingo." So I'm like, "Great." But then as I started talking to them, I understand they don't have the engineers and PMs there looking at Mixpanel or whatever it is that they're using every day, understanding how every single change is leading to other changes that enables them to ask the questions and come up with the hypotheses that allow them to get to the next step. So it's almost like they just copy-pasted something.

(00:35:09):
You know how I think of that? It's like those students who are able to copy the best student's answer on the math test, and then they get frustrated that they didn't get an A because the work wasn't there, but they copied the answer. But if you don't know how to do the work, you get another math question and you're not going to get it right. And so that I think still misses, and I would venture to say most early stage tech startups out there. It's certainly the case in Latin America, where people think they can outsource the code or outsource the growth, and they're not just looking like hawks at the quality of the data and statistical significance and running hypotheses and questioning them. And that rigor is a culture at Duolingo that was there from day one before me and continues to be there today.

Lenny (00:35:58):
Amazing. So I think if a listener is trying to build a subscription consumer app, I would suggest just rewind and listen to that again. I think there's so much gold there. And in my experience, I get a lot of decks because I do a bunch of angel investing. I just discount consumer subscription apps because they never work, except when they do once in a while. And so my advice is if you're building something in this space, just listen to exactly what you just said. There's a lot of important stuff, and actually internalize it. Stay really lean, stay really focused, obsessed with retention, obsessed with making sure the product is solving the problem you're going after.

Gina Gotthilf (00:36:33):
I'm so glad that you agree, Lenny. I really admire you. So it makes me very happy.

Lenny (00:36:37):
Well, we're both happy then. I wanted to switch to the B side, and I'm curious, what's a mess-up or a big mistake maybe that you made or your team made that was like, "Oh, wow, that was a big waste of time?"

Gina Gotthilf (00:36:50):
Look, a lot of things didn't work out. More than 50% of our AB tests didn't work out. We made bets that didn't make sense. I will say, though, that in the spirit of A and B sides, I, and think in general, we are really good at forgetting the B stuff. I talk so much about all the stuff that worked that it's hard to remember all of those moments that didn't actually work. And the thing that I tend to talk about, which is this mistake that we made as the growth team, is almost like one of those, when you get asked in an interview, "What's your biggest weakness?" And you're like, "I'm a perfectionist." It's one of those things that actually makes you sound good because it's the story about how my team really wanted to implement badges. We spent a lot of time playing all the games that were popular at the time, trying to understand how those gamification growth hacks that we could find in those apps would potentially overlay onto Duolingo and how we would do that.

(00:37:48):
And badges was just pervasive in all of the top games. And so it seemed like a no-brainer. But since we ranked all of our experiments in terms of ROI and return being how many users we think we're going to get from this, DAUs and time investments, it never made sense to focus on this, because we thought that the time sink would be too high. So I actually ended up not letting the team run this experiment for six months so that we focus on lower hanging fruit. So that's a mistake on my end. Then we decided to run this experiment in the most lean way possible. We're like, "You know what? There's MVPs, there's minimum viable experiments. We don't have to run a whole badges thing. We can just do something more simple and actually see if that leads to growth in an interesting way, and then we'll know."

(00:38:32):
And we ran this very simple experiment that was like, "You sign up and then you get a badge." And it was like this girl with a balloon, I don't know, she was happy or whatever. And of course, in retrospect, it led to no results, because no one is proud of signing up. It's not an exciting moment, and you don't even have badges to collect. You can't show it to other people. None of the things that make badges compelling were there, but we were like, "Well, we does it. It didn't work." And then we moved on. So we moved on for another, I don't know, eight months, and we didn't look back. And then when we did look back, first of all, at that point, we discovered that we hadn't been dogfooding, which also was embarrassing.

(00:39:06):
Looking back, we hadn't been dogfooding in the growth team. We'd just come up with hypotheses. We were super careful about prioritizing them and making sure that we were doing the best possible write-ups and all these things. But the dogfooding piece just, I didn't come from a product background. I was a marketer, and I didn't really understand the term dogfooding. But when we had a conversation, we were like, "You know what? If we had just tested that, we would have all known that this was a super lame badge." And I was like, "Why are we not testing our experiments?" And so that became part of our practice.

(00:39:38):
It's still relevant. I just had a conversation yesterday with engineers at Latitude. I haven't explained what we're building yet. Maybe we'll get there. But I was talking yesterday to engineers at Latitude, and they're awesome. In terms of product team, we have have the number eight employee at NewBank. You might have heard of NewBank, but it's this massive banking fin tech in Latin America, and we have people from other fin techs, and then we have this guy who's a lead PM at Twilio, and I was explaining to them why we should be dogfooding. And they were all like, "Oh yeah, we should dogfood." It's just easy to forget stuff like that.

(00:40:10):
So that was a mistake that we could have probably gotten to the growth that we got to with badges much earlier on. And not only did we get to growth with badges, but it became this amazing treasure trove of opportunity. Because once you have badges and people want them, you can now ask people to do anything like go find friends, go buy things, whatever it is. And so we impacted almost all metrics across the company positively, including some we hadn't expected, but it's easy to talk about a mistake that ended up being a win. So that's why I compared it to the interview thing in the beginning. But we tried making Duolingo a social app really early on and failed. It was called Duels, DuoDuels. You could duel.

Lenny (00:40:55):
Very clever.

Gina Gotthilf (00:40:56):
I know. We were clever, but people didn't use it, and we didn't figure out why. We tried making a Duolingo for Schools platform. We couldn't get it to pick up. I went and launched Duolingo in China, and it got downloaded by a million people in the first day, and then the app got blocked because of the government, and then we couldn't figure out what to do. And then everyone rated the app one star because it didn't work, and so then we had a lot of trouble actually recovering from that. We launched Duolingo in India and didn't realize because we couldn't have unless we went there, which we finally did, that most people set their phone UI in India to English, because typing in Hindi is hard, and of course there's a lot of languages throughout India. And we were making it so that when you downloaded Duolingo, whatever UI your phone was set to, we offered not that language for you to learn. That was your base language.

(00:41:48):
So we were telling people learn French, Spanish, German from English, and they were all trying to learn English, so they didn't find what they were looking for and they left. There were so many mistakes, and luckily I think we were able to bounce back from most of them in terms of how Duolingo is doing today.

Lenny (00:42:05):
Man, there's so much there. That was awesome. I like that you're like, "Oh, I don't remember any of my failures." And then like, "Oh, here's all these awesome stories." That was great. Just one thread there that comes up again and again in this podcast is the dogfooding piece, especially I think people don't trust their gut and personal instinct enough. I think a lot of times PMs are just like, "I need to do user research to understand what we should be doing." Versus just use the thing, see what feels wrong and keeps you from being excited and really trust that. I find that more and more. I don't know. When I read a thing and when I'm writing, I'm just like, "Oh, I don't like that. I should change that. I don't need to run this by three people." So I think that's a really good lesson there. Just don't underestimate the power of you just using it and relying on instincts and feelings you have when you're trying to use it.

Gina Gotthilf (00:42:50):
Totally. And that's so hard to do, especially when you're young. And I think I'll add that, especially when you're female as well, or maybe other minorities. It's just really hard to trust your instinct because you're constantly telling yourself, do I really know anything or am I just being lucky? But you have to, and I think that forcing yourself to pretend that you know answers and just finding out what this pretend person who would know all the answers would think is really helpful because it helps you develop your point of view, your voice, and to trust yourself, even when you're working on something that you don't fully understand.

(00:43:22):
As in we're building a banking platform at Latitude, I was looking at it, and they were having trouble understanding why people were having problems with wires. And I told them all about how I'm an idiot when it comes to wires, and I make these mistakes A, B, C, because I don't match the line. It's like, whatever. There's all this information you're supposed to input, and sometimes the information you get is not in the same order. And they're like, "Wow." And I'm like, "This is just me as a user making dumb mistakes." But that is our forte. When you're able to understand that when you don't get something, probably other people don't get it too at scale.

Lenny (00:43:56):
Absolutely. It's like if you're thinking about asking a question in class, many people are thinking of that same question, and they will appreciate you asking it. The other thing that stood out there, so the Hindi mistake you made, I actually made the same mistake with my podcast recently. I was noticing that the second biggest market of listeners is in India. So I'm like, how do I lean into that and help people in India find this podcast even better? So I added subtitles in Hindi to a number of the episodes and tweeted it being, "Oh, look at me go, I'm going to make this so great for people in India." And everyone's like, "We don't need this. We prefer English. People in tech in India, we know English."

Gina Gotthilf (00:44:33):
That's true.

Lenny (00:44:33):
"This is even harder." They're like, "I can read a lot faster in English, so please don't do this." So that was a really good learning-

Gina Gotthilf (00:44:39):
There's so many languages in India.

Lenny (00:44:41):
That, too.

Gina Gotthilf (00:44:42):
Really, it's crazy how people don't speak the same languages across the whole country, but also it means that people in India are fluent in so many different languages.

Lenny (00:44:52):
We live, we learn. I want to go back to the A side and just a couple more questions about Duolingo. You said that most of the growth was organic and you basically had to grow it organically. Is there anything that you can share that worked really well? Because everybody wants to grow organically through word-of-mouth. Is there anything tactical you did that really helped Duolingo that other startups can do and try?

Gina Gotthilf (00:45:12):
Absolutely. So first of all, I would actually say that AB testing and product-led growth is organic growth, because you're not spending money on it. And so the first thing that you can do, no matter what stage your startup is, is make sure that you are not overlooking the importance of people in your product team who really know how to evaluate data and how to use that and learn. And if you're too early stage, you're not looking at 5% growth, you're looking at 20, 30% growth opportunities. But I think that's number one.

(00:45:44):
Number two, actually, this is something I might have said is something that Duolingo did really well, but I think it goes hand-in-hand with mission. But throwing the mission thing aside, brand and PR. So the importance of building a lovable brand that really resonates with people and makes people feel something and want to stand behind an idea that's bigger than themselves is not easy to do, but possible and core to being able to increase word-of-mouth.

(00:46:19):
So at the bottom of this is the mission, which is Duolingo, the mission was always originally to bring free language education to the world, then to build the best education to make it accessible to everyone. I don't know how they're wording it today, but that's something most people can get behind. It doesn't matter if you think Bloomberg or Trump should be president. Do you think everyone should have access to great education? Most people would say yes. And so that's much more powerful than, do you want to download an app and learn a new language?

(00:46:48):
So if you're able to have that and things that you really believe in about what you're building that's changing lives or impacting the world, even if it is just helping business people do their jobs better in a way that's going to improve their lives and their ability to make a living, or it's going to improve a company's ability, whatever it is, the bigger idea behind it and focusing on creating something that people like, whichever your audience is. It might be a more serious audience and something like Duolingo, but for Duolingo it meant we have this owl, the colors, and then the way that the owl talks and the notifications and the emails that you get and the product experience.

(00:47:26):
All of that ties back into how people feel about your brand, which makes it so that people are more likely to talk about it, which makes it so that you are much more likely to get a reporter to write a story about you, if you have something that's meaningful outside of like, "Hey, TechCrunch, did you know that my app grew by 20% last month?" They're like, "I don't care." But if you're able to tell a story about people whose lives are completely transformed or something like that, that's much more interesting and has played an important role in, honestly, my work at Tumblr, at Duolingo, not my Bloomberg presidential campaign, but definitely Latitude as well.

Lenny (00:48:02):
That's amazing. I was going to ask, what does that actually mean, and how do you build a lovable brand? And so what I've heard so far is there's this personality and voice that was really fun that you all lead into make it not just a generic translation app. It's like, oh, this is really fun and interesting. And then this other piece is these stories of transformation.

Gina Gotthilf (00:48:21):
Yeah, there's more, there's more. So I think a brand that stands for something, that truly stands for something, that's where the mission piece comes in.

Lenny (00:48:30):
How do you communicate that? How do you people even know that the brand stands for that?

Gina Gotthilf (00:48:34):
So that has to be an integral part of your communication. In the early days, we tested a lot of stuff on social media. We made, again, mistakes. At one point we were posting photos of our team on Facebook being like, "Check out the behind the scenes." Guess what? No one cares. But we had a calendar, this is very tactical, but a social media calendar where one post a week is about effectiveness, because we knew that proving that Duolingo was an effective way to learn a language and actually having data behind that moved the needle. So making sure that was part of our communication in terms of our social media calendar, in terms of the PR pitches that we were making, in terms of whatever we were able to communicate out into the world, and then make sure that one post a week was something about the mission and what we were actually trying to accomplish.

(00:49:17):
But it also got embedded into a lot of things. For example, when we were testing screens to get people to convert into paid users on Duolingo, we found that including something like, "By paying for Duolingo, you're making language learning accessible to millions of people," that actually improved the metric. People cared enough to make the payment. So it really can be anywhere. In addition to that, I love copywriting, and I believe that communication is constantly underrated, and communication isn't about being able to convey a message. It's about being able to convey a message in a way that the listener receives it and understands it and remembers it. And that's really hard to do. And one of the things I've helped employ at Duolingo that I think is still there today, it's definitely not-

Gina Gotthilf (00:50:00):
I've helped employ at Duolingo, that I think is still there today, it's definitely not just me, we're an amazing team, but I've helped employ that I've used at Latitud in other places is a unique voice and what that means is exactly what you said, Lenny, not just another language learning app where we give you instructions and you follow directions. There is always a quirk. It's unexpected. The way we talk to you is a little bit funny. It doesn't take ourselves too seriously and it makes the person receiving this message feel something. It's about how you make people feel and you feel like either you giggle or you're like, "Wait, what? They just did what?" And using that to your benefit. We use that a lot at Latitud today as well in terms of especially our newsletter, just self-deprecating humor and that's what's helped us grow so quickly in Latin America in such a short amount of time. People identify with it, they see themselves as part of that. Again, much like the mission versus your company, and I'm a consumer.

Lenny (00:50:59):
This episode is brought to you by Mercury, who I also happen to use for my business checking account. I've tried a lot of business banks and there is nothing even close to the experience you get with Mercury. I moved cash over from another bank and it literally took less than half an hour to set up the account and wire money over at no cost. They kind of make you want to use the site more often, which I've never felt with another banking site. Mercury is banking engineered for the startup journey, a modern solution to help your company become the best version of itself and Mercury isn't just a place to hold and send money. It's software built to help you scale with safety and stability, whether you're a team of two or a team of 1,000.

(00:51:37):
Mercury also goes beyond banking to provide you with access to the foremost investors, operators and tools. Visit mercury.com to join over 100,000 startups on Mercury, the powerful and intuitive way for ambitious companies to bank. Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank & Trust members FDIC. Is there an example of that, kind of like a message you remember for either from Duolingo or from even Latitud or something that worked that was really funny or different?

Gina Gotthilf (00:52:09):
Look, I think for Duolingo we constantly looked at every copy we wrote and asked, "Could this have been written by other companies? Could this have been any other company or is it Duolingo? What makes this Duolingo?" And it was tough because the more people you hire who come from other backgrounds, they're not used to that style and they might even think it's unprofessional or whatever. You're like, "Nope, this is the Duolingo way." So, it helps figuring out, exactly what does that voice, what does it sound like? What are some words that it tends to use? Why yes, why not? What's too much, what's too little? In terms of specific examples, this is something that I didn't write myself, but I wrote a lot of notifications for Duolingo for the passive-aggressive messages that I'm sure people have received, which started and then became a meme and then Duolingo used as well, but the whole, "This doesn't seem to be working. We'll stop sending them for now," message, which you got after five days of inactivity. In addition to that message, around the same time we decided to send an email to people in New Year's because that's when people make a resolution to do things and we wanted them to make learning a language a resolution for the year. So, we created an email and it had Sad Duo because there was... I don't know if the screen is still there, I haven't used Duolingo in a while, but there was always a screen of Duo really sad when you fail something and that [inaudible 00:53:24]-

Lenny (00:53:23):
Duo the owl.

Gina Gotthilf (00:53:25):
Duo is the owl, sorry. The green owl will cry and we A/B tested the size of the puddle and the number of tears that came out of his eyes in terms of effectiveness. So, we used Sad Duo in one of those emails and then someone picked it up on Twitter and the passive-aggressive message and this Sad Duo, they started making their own versions, which was like, "Study now or Duo will eat a poisoned loaf of bread," or, "The next email will be a funeral e-vite," things like that.

(00:53:58):
And so that's an example, I think, to me, which can now be seen very much throughout Duolingo's brand where we could have just said, "Oh no, this is a PR disaster. We need to go back to being this friendly, nice little fluffy thing that everyone loves." Instead being like, "No, we get that people think this is funny and we're just going to run with it," because using the Duo voice, it gives us the permission to do that because we're not square, we're not going to do that thing that you read in the textbook in school. We're kind of going to play along with it.

Lenny (00:54:29):
That's an incredible lesson. It reminds me of this famous Duolingo meme that I'm sure you've seen where someone shared these... They got these two notifications in a row, I just pulled it up here, where first they got this Duolingo push notification, "It looks like you forgot your Spanish lessons again, you know what happens now," and then the next push was from their security system, "Intruder alert, backdoor, proceed with caution," and I imagine Duolingo even leaned into that, I think when this started spreading.

Gina Gotthilf (00:54:54):
100%, and it wasn't an easy decision because of course a lot of people in the company were really concerned about the brand image and, what are people doing and how do we revert this, that kind of thing. So, it was a bet that we made where we're just going to, "No, we're going to lean into it because that's what having this unique voice means. It's about getting it. It's about being part of something bigger. It's about connecting with people outside of just teaching them a word a day," or whatever it is. And with Latitud, I think we do that all the time in our newsletter and it's a lot of self-deprecating humor for Latinos and using expressions that could be almost offensive, but they're not in terms of Latinos only, but also the tech world, making fun of being a tech founder and the things that we do that we think are okay and it's just a lot of that where I think I would call it irreverent.

(00:55:45):
It's a tough line, it's a lot easier to be, I think, a copywriter in a place that doesn't want to do that because the lines are a lot clearer and you don't have to take as many risks, but it's so less fun, which I think makes it so less fun for the user because people are used to getting emails from their banks with corporate lingo that you don't understand, but if they get an email from their bank that's funny, ironic, but also very informative, that's a bank email I'm going to read.

Lenny (00:56:12):
I think that's a really good lesson. Part of this is just taking a risk. I think that's one of the big takeaways here is just take some risks. We had Lulu Cheng on the podcast who is a huge advocate of that. She is a PR comms person that's worked at Substack and Blizzard now, and that was her advice to people-

Gina Gotthilf (00:56:27):
Take risks?

Lenny (00:56:28):
Take risks, do things that are a little controversial because that'll get attention. I definitely want to talk about Latitud, just a couple more questions on Duolingo. One is, today feels like one of the most interesting things about Duolingo is their TikTok presence and it feels like they're doing so well, kind of leaning into exactly what you're talking about, just being really silly and different with the owl especially. I guess the question there is just, what is it that you think allows for that? Is it just this very special social media person they hired that was just incredibly good at this thing and being irreverent as you said, or is there something else that contributes and allows a company to win in social media the way that Duolingo has?

Gina Gotthilf (00:57:07):
Look, I haven't met the person who does a TikTok and they're fantastic. I definitely don't want to demerit their work. It's awesome, I don't think it's easy to do, especially on a consistent basis. So I think, yes, finding someone who gets humor, who gets the platform, who's able to produce content quickly, but also reacts to learnings, all of that is not easy to do. However, I do think that everything we just talked about is at the bottom of that because if Duolingo didn't have this unique voice and leaned into the humor and wanted to be irreverent as a brand and was so focused on connecting with people where they were and ready to take risks that might seem maybe unorthodox, especially in terms of education, then an opportunity to build a TikTok like that wouldn't exist. So it's both, and I think it goes back to the brand DNA, it goes back to the culture of the company and to the attention, as I said, to every single text that was published and whether or not it wasn't the right voice or not.

(00:58:06):
It has to do with having those conversations with the executive team where you talk about who is Duo and what are they like and how do they talk and what do they sound like and is this a Duo thing to say, is this not a Duo thing to say? And committing to this idea that you're going to be remembered, that you're going to do things that sometimes are going to rub people the wrong way, and you're not just going to sit squarely in one place. I think that opens the possibility for a TikTok like the one that Duolingo has today to exist, but again, whoever's running the TikTok, you're amazing.

Lenny (00:58:42):
That's such a good lesson. A lot of people are looking at Duolingo, we need to find that person at our company. And what you're saying is it takes a lot more than that. That person is not going to have a good time if the culture of the company isn't set up to be that... To have that approach to try to just take risks and be irreverent, so that's a really good point. One final question around internationalization, you said that you helped drive internationalization of Duolingo, and I read somewhere that one of the learnings you had there was essentially treat everyone the same almost across countries, which I think people think is the counter. They should often like, "No, we should be super personalized for every country we're in." What did you learn there?

Gina Gotthilf (00:59:22):
I think this is very controversial because not only is it the case that when you're working in regulated industries, maybe in more B2B situations, looking at specific countries is important. Looking at specific countries and elements of these countries are important, especially when you're looking at, I don't know, laws and if you need legal differences and there's a lot of things that make countries different is what I'm trying to get. However, humans are very similar and we think we're very different. I don't think we're that different. I think that maybe we were brought up differently, and so for example, in Brazil we like to dance. In Mexico, we like to dance salsa, in some places it's okay to hug and other places it's not okay to hug. Yes, there are cultural differences and it's important to love everyone and to adapt, et cetera, but a lot of these differences when it comes to core human behavior are that final 5% of understanding people.

(01:00:27):
And if as a startup, whether it be early stage, but as a startup you focus too much on those marginal differences between groups of people, you can run the risk of making big mistakes, which is making too many changes too soon and learning very little and adding crazy amounts of code complexity and overall organizational complexity to what you're building. And with Duolingo, because it was a consumer app, because we weren't dealing with a lot of regulatory issues, except for China where we had to watch out for certain words and phrases, in general, people want to learn a language and people learn a certain way and people use apps a certain way. So, there's a lot of commonality. We just found that by treating the world as one, and whenever we deployed an A/B test or tried something new in terms of marketing, we would just look at it as like, "Well, if this worked here, it will work there and we should just try it out everywhere," which meant every time I went and launched Duolingo new market, I got the same feedback.

(01:01:27):
Whatever country it was, "Here, it's different. People are different. You don't understand and what you're doing is not going to work and here's why you need to change." And if we had actually listened to that, it would cause all kinds of problems. In our country, we think that green is a negative color, owls are poorly seen as an animal, or here people think that free things are actually of low value, they like things that are expensive. Oh, people here really like free things and I'm like, "Everyone likes free things." They're like, "Oh, in this country..." Whatever, so yes, I think that countries are different, but it's more important to realize that people like to think they're different and people like to think their countries are different and highlight those because it makes them feel special, unique. We're all special and unique in all of our amazing ways, but this is not necessarily it.

(01:02:13):
And when you're trying to be super cautious of your resources, you have to ignore some of that because then you're able to roll out things once, which is important, but in addition to that, every new A/B test you want to run or every new hypothesis you have, if you now have a version of your app that's different in Mexico, in China, in India, whatever, you're going to have to run that test and whatever change you have in all of those versions, and then you just start having all of these different versions of the app everywhere and good luck managing that in terms of code, in terms of processes, in terms of personnel, in terms of costs, and most importantly in terms of time because now every single experiment or hypothesis is going to take you way longer to be able to deploy, and time is almost more important than money when you're a startup. So, it's important to keep things super simple, and this was something that we did that actually ended up paying off with few exceptions like India and China.

Lenny (01:03:12):
That is such cool advice. It reminds me of a quote that I think of that a friend of mine shared once, "Life is maintenance. Anything you add to your life is just something you're going to have to maintain from that point forward," and similar in products. Any time you add new code, you're going to maintain that code forever, and the more you can not add anything new and not make things really different, the easier everything gets. People forget that. It's like, "Oh, we're just going to spend a bunch of time to make it awesome in China or Brazil," and then, oh, they have to maintain that forever and every you feature has to...

Gina Gotthilf (01:03:42):
And it's an 80/20, so just focus on what will get you the 80 and not the 20. And then when you have the luxury of focusing on the 20, then you can.

Lenny (01:03:52):
So, speaking of different cultures and people being different but not that different, you pivoted your career basically to focus on Latin America. First of all, why did you decide to do that? That's a pretty unique path and what pulled you there?

Gina Gotthilf (01:04:09):
So Lenny, I don't see it as a pivot because as we were joking in the beginning, I've been an employee, I was an operator there at early stage startups and now I'm a founder and I'm a VC, so I'm still kind of in this little stack of roles that we have in our little tech ecosystem. And in my time working with Tumblr and my agency and Duolingo, I had the pleasure of speaking with entrepreneurs all over the world, in part because I started getting some media because of the work that I've been doing starting at Tumblr, so a lot of entrepreneurs reached out to me, but also because I became a mentor for an organization called Endeavor, which is global. So, I started working with entrepreneurs in Japan and Brazil on my free time, just mentoring. And I know that the opportunity for growth in terms of tech in Latin America is huge because first of all, the opportunity for growth in tech is huge all over the world, meaning there's just more and more to do.

(01:05:09):
There's more pieces of our lives that can become more efficient or better or cheaper by making them digital in some way, shape or form because digital products scale. We are behind when it comes to that in terms of Latin America, and our economy is also not doing super great right now. There's a number of things that make it tougher to succeed in Latin America, but make the outcome of potential success much higher. And simply put, there's a lot of low hanging fruit because a lot of what has already been digitized and productized in the US and more developed markets just hasn't in Latin America. And every time I took these calls, I would think like, "Well, this is not very efficient for me to be doing this one-to-one call. I feel very good about myself, I feel great, and this entrepreneur learned a lot, but I wish I could do this more at scale."

(01:05:56):
And also it doesn't seem like this is what's going to help this entrepreneur succeed. Maybe it's a little bit of advice, but it's like... And not only that, but I had a lot of experiences where I would mention something about growth that I had learned and that would blow the entrepreneur's mind. And I would think, "Why do I know this, but not this entrepreneur who honestly is smarter and more ambitious than me?" Oh, it's because I've had a career in Silicon Valley. It's because I've gotten to work with some of the best people in the world and I have access to this information just free flowing in my way all the time, and we take it for granted. So, how can we make this more accessible to Latin America's entrepreneurs, so that they can have access to that? What else is hard to get access to that could really get in the way?

(01:06:34):
Oh, like access to capital. So, what's the VC in the angel ecosystem looking like and what can we do that can actually impact that at scale? And then there's other pieces of the ecosystem that are missing, like if you're going to start a company, you have to incorporate it. It sounds super boring, but Brazil is one of the countries that takes the longest time to incorporate a company in the world, but then if you're going to get investment, you probably can't get investment in your Brazil entity because investors are like, "I don't know anything about Brazil, and sounds like a lot of employers get sued by their employees and lose," which is totally true, "And there's all this liability. I feel much more comfortable investing in a Delaware company." So then entrepreneurs are like, "Oh man, now I have to create this entity in Delaware. I don't even know where that is and what's the C-core? What's this other thing?"

(01:07:19):
So, there's just stuff that needs to happen for Latin Americans that we don't think about here, "Silicon Valley" talking about it as in the cloud in the US and developed markets, but also then you're able to raise money, how do you get money down to your country? That's not simple at all. How do you think about the FX transactions and not get screwed in the process and who's going to do it? And so anyway, there's a number of these things that make it super hard. And so, that's some of the problems that we wanted to solve.

(01:07:47):
Why it matters to me? I'm Brazilian, I'm Latin American, and I know that I had all of the opportunities in the world. I went to an American school, I got to go to school in the US, I got to work with some of the best tech companies in the world, and 99.9% of people in Latin America will not have these opportunities. And so for me, if I don't use this privilege to somehow make a huge impact where I came from, that will last, then I kind of wasted my life. So, that's why this matters so much to me, and I met my co-founder, Brian Requarth at On Deck. If you've heard of On Deck before, I'm a big fan.

Lenny (01:08:24):
I'm wearing On Deck socks right now. Yeah, I am.

Gina Gotthilf (01:08:28):
I love their socks, and I just had a conversation with them yesterday. I am a big fan of what they built. I met Brian doing On Deck... I actually was thinking of starting a completely different company, but also focused on community. As we were talking about, people want to find connection, and I think that there's a lot of business opportunity there, but I met my co-founder and he was working with our third co-founder, Yuri, who was actually the guy... We joke he's the guy who builds things.

(01:08:53):
He's the CTO, he actually knows how to build and started talking about what it is that we can do to make an impact in the speed at which tech startups succeed in Latin America because we think we can have a huge impact on the GDP of the whole region, developments, job opportunities, and so on and so forth. So to me, that's what motivates me. It's like figuring out how I can use my time as leverage to make the biggest impact possible in terms of socioeconomical mobility for people in the world and focusing on the part of the world that I came from made the most sense.

Lenny (01:09:26):
So you referenced this company, that you started Latitud. Maybe just describe briefly, just broadly, how do you pitch what Latitud does to folks that might find it useful?

Gina Gotthilf (01:09:35):
I will, and I still do a pretty bad job with pitching it, but the pitch is basically we're building the operating system for Latin American early stage tech startups, and what that means is that building a startup is hard anywhere, but it's extra hard in Latin America for some of the reasons that I outlined. Some of the things that we decided to solve for are one, it's super lonely to be a founder. And if you're able to meet great founders who are just a step ahead of you in anything, be it in product or growth or marketing or incorporation or finances, you can save yourself so much time from trying to read books and Google if they can just tell you what to do or connect you with the right person, that if we were able to connect these people meaningfully, we could make a huge impact.

(01:10:16):
So, that's number one, it's lonely. And number two, you build a startup in Brazil and you're like, "Wow, this is working. I'm going to go to Silicon Valley." I've seen this happen a lot in the past decade, and Silicon Valley is a completely different place. The US, it's a different place, the competition's different. 3% of people in Brazil only, and that varies in Latin America, speak English. So, the likelihood of you being taken seriously is low. Your chances of success are low, but at the same time, Latin America has so much in common as a region, but we don't actually actually see that if we're Latin Americans. We just think we're countries, especially Brazilians don't think that they're part of the rest, and Mexicans don't think about Brazil. It's so far, look at it on the map. In the US you're like, oh Latin America."

(01:10:58):
But if you're there, it's just not at all connected, but the opportunities of growth are huge and dependent on whether you meet the right people are able to open doors and understand that our problems are so similar that a solution for one part of this region could potentially be great for another part of the region. I'm not doing a great job of pitching, but in addition to it being lonely and it being difficult to find the right resources and really trustworthy knowledge, it's really hard to raise capital and it's really hard to do things like incorporate and bring your money down, et cetera. So, that's what we do. First, we have a fellowship program. We have 1,500 entrepreneurs who got in, we run four cohorts a year, about 600 applicants per, and so you get in and you get access to all of these resources we've put together.

(01:11:44):
You get to find out what everyone thinks about other investors in the region because I think it's important to disseminate that information. You get access to introductions to investors through each other and advice and events. In addition, we have a fund, so we've invested in 100 startups and we're raising our second fund now. It's going to be around $25 million with a $30 million cap, so that's another thing. So we invest, you figure out your investment game, but you might become one of our investments as well. And in addition, we have products that make it a lot easier to navigate the super, in my opinion, boring and frustrating stuff behind starting a company that you don't want to think about it as an entrepreneur because you're trying to solve a problem and build a team and build a product.

(01:12:25):
You're not trying to figure out what's the best incorporation method and how to open a bank account in the US and how to figure out the foreign exchange prices and bring the money down and how to manage that money or how to stay compliant in your country, and then in two other jurisdictions, if you have a Delaware and a Cayman. So, we do all of that for you and make it easy through a dashboard we built, a bank that we built, and so on and so forth. So, it's not an easy to describe business because it's kind of an ecosystem play. We're trying to elevate the tech ecosystem in Latin America, and it's a lot of moving parts.

Lenny (01:13:02):
You basically help them do everything, which is what I'm hearing, and it sounds like you'd be a fool not to take advantage of this. The customers essentially are founders in any Latin America country, is that right?

Gina Gotthilf (01:13:14):
Founders in Latin America, but we also have a lot of US-based founders who are building for Latin America because they understand that the opportunity there is huge.

Lenny (01:13:22):
Awesome, and then what is the arrangement? Do you take equity if they join the program? Is it free?

Gina Gotthilf (01:13:28):
We don't, joining the program is free. You just have to be able to get in. For a number of reasons, we just don't want to deter anyone who's amazing from being part of this community, and so that's why we made that decision. If we invest, we take equity. If you choose to use our products, that's a paid thing. So, you can choose what makes sense for you.

Lenny (01:13:47):
Something I wanted to ask about is what is it that Latin American founders and companies are uniquely good at? Is there kind of a thread across Latin American startups that are like, oh, they're so good at this area, pay attention here?

Gina Gotthilf (01:14:03):
In general terms, startup founders have to be really scrappy and resourceful and resilient. Latin Americans tend to be very scrappy, resourceful, and resilient because of just the realities in which we were brought up in. We have words for that that we don't have in English and Portuguese in Spanish, which is like dancing around things and figuring out things when you don't have other solutions. So, I think that's something that we see a lot. In terms of what we're really good at, I would say first of all, there's opportunity in every single vertical in Latin America because it's such a wide open field, so there's opportunity everywhere.

(01:14:40):
It's not that we're particularly good at FinTech, for example, but if you look at the FinTech opportunity in Latin America right now, it's so hot and there's so much money and there's so much happening because of the huge problem of people not having access to bank accounts or access to credit, or just all of the bureaucracy that exists in trying to get those things or to make payments and so on and so forth. So, there's just huge opportunity there. I'm trying to think what else-

Gina Gotthilf (01:15:00):
So there's just huge opportunity there. Trying to think what else I would highlight. Ah, Lenny, you talked about B2C. I think again, because there's so much open field, there's so much opportunity when it comes to B2B, especially when you're talking about SMBs. There's a lot of small and medium businesses doing things on paper, so figure out what they are and how you can make them not on paper and deploy them effectively. So I think that's an advantage we have.

(01:15:28):
Other than that, I wouldn't highlight anything in particular. I think that there's amazing people all over the world. It's just a matter of what are the opportunities that exist. And because there's so many opportunities that are Latin America specific or that are emerging market specific, which means that if they work in an emerging market in Latin America, they could work in other emerging markets. And you know what? Most of the world is not developed markets and understanding what it's like to not have access to amazing wifi and iPhones and all the things that we have access to, that can be a huge advantage because that's the reality that most of the population lives in. And that's a huge TAM.

Lenny (01:16:08):
That makes me think about WhatsApp. And one of the reasons they made it is they were just obsessed with making the app incredibly small and fast. And they started, I think with international markets and then that just ended up being an amazing app so fast and so easy to use.

Gina Gotthilf (01:16:22):
And still, and now there's things being built on top of WhatsApp. We just invested in a company called Leadsales, and they basically turn your WhatsApp into a CRM, which is amazing because so much business is being done on WhatsApp, and that's not the case here in the US. So you want to understand that you can build something for that. And there are other markets that are using WhatsApp for which that's also going to be useful. And the other thing is I think that emerging or developing markets tend to sometimes skip over things because we're so behind.

(01:16:48):
So for example, there's examples of these in India and in some countries in Africa where, I don't know, the desktop was skipped, people just went straight to mobile. I think we can see these catapult opportunities because then when you start building something and you didn't even build for the previous version of whatever it is that was being used because in the US or more developed market, you had access to them, then you are in a way at an advantage. So I'm excited to see how that plays out in the next few years, and I'm particularly curious to see how that plays out when it comes to AI.

Lenny (01:17:21):
One last question around Latin America. It's going to be a broad question. What do you think people should be paying attention to, whether it's specific companies you want to call out, big companies that are doing great or just trends or patterns, what do you think people should be paying attention to? Anything you want to shout out?

Gina Gotthilf (01:17:39):
Lenny, the truth is I would love to call out all of our portfolio companies. I believe in all of them, and there are some of them that are growing incredibly impressively. One of them is Pomelo, which is a FinTech platform for FinTechs that is just grown incredibly. To me, it's more about paying attention to Latin America. I think for the US, that's already a lot. I don't think people know what's going on below the border, I have no idea what Brazil is like, but paying attention because it's not just a place that's behind and trying to catch up. It's a place where the opportunity to make a lot of money exists. It's a higher risk region because of all the political and economic instability. But given the scenario that we're in right now, which is that we're still behind in terms of all the solutions that we know will be built to give people access to health, to education, to financial services, et cetera.

(01:18:36):
But we actually have a lot of money flowing into the region in terms of venture capital. We have the best talent we've ever had because now we've had, I forget how many, but a lot of IPOs that came from Latin America and unicorn companies, people who have worked at those companies or who have worked places like Duolingo are coming back to build now, know what they're doing. And so there's a number of things that have come together that make now a really exciting time to build a startup in Latin America and to scale it. So from an investment perspective, I just think that there's a lot of hot opportunities now in terms of knowing what's a good opportunity versus not. I think the same rules probably apply to those anywhere else, which is most importantly, the entrepreneur. Does this person know what they're talking about?

(01:19:23):
Do they have an unfair advantage in terms of knowing what a problem that exists and knowing how to solve it in a way that others couldn't do? They have access to the best talent in the world, not just in the region that will actually join them and build the best thing possible. And yeah, what's the TAM? And not just what they put on the slide, but what you actually believe the TAM to be. So that's what I would say. I think everyone's looking at FinTech and Latin America right now. It's hot, it's profitable. Money is where the money is, but I'm super excited about what happens with health and education in particular because I think that that has the power to truly transform the region in a massive way.

(01:20:05):
At Latitud, I think I mentioned in addition to FinTech, we tend to invest a lot in B2B SMB platforms that are helping businesses scale and work more effectively because there is a huge need for that and there's an opportunity to build. And I think that that can have an impact on the region. So I think that would be my advice. It's a little broad, but other than that, if not, I would just now sit here and tell you 15 companies that we love at Latitud and I won't.

Lenny (01:20:33):
Well, we can point people to your portfolio page on your website.

Gina Gotthilf (01:20:38):
I would love to highlight our portfolio companies. Maybe I'll just send you a list or something. I don't know.

Lenny (01:20:42):
Perfect. We will figure out a way to share that. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Gina, are you ready?

Gina Gotthilf (01:20:50):
I'm ready, Lenny.

Lenny (01:20:52):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Gina Gotthilf (01:20:57):
The one book I recommend because I truly, it really changed the way I think about things. It taught me a lot about a discipline I had never really thought much about, but also because I think it makes me sound smart and it's a really short book, so it's easy to get through is The Design Of Everyday Things. For me, that was the first time that I realized that design wasn't just this sort of cool thing that some people were into and they had to get and it made things beautiful. It was about understanding how everything is designed and how to think about design and usability.

(01:21:28):
So for someone like me who didn't have any experience in product before, I think it could be transformative. And then the second book, it has nothing to do with what we do. I recommend Viktor Frankl's Man's Search For Meaning because at heart I'm a philosopher and I tend to think a lot about life, the meaning of life and what differentiates one life from the next and how to live a good one. And no matter what profession we choose that continues to be important. So those are my recommendations.

Lenny (01:22:01):
What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you really enjoy?

Gina Gotthilf (01:22:04):
So first of all, I love Succession, but I don't think we have to go into that. One that was recommended to me by a friend who I very much admire was Mike Krieger, co-founder of Instagram is How to with John Wilson. It's a really weird TV show that I would've never found if it wasn't for him. But the premise is basically this guy, I think he's a filmmaker and he's awkward and it's cool that he's awkward. It's just his style and he decides to make a TV show about creating to help people who are really worried or scared of doing something and helping them prepare for that moment in their lives.

(01:22:42):
So for example, someone is really scared of telling their friends that they lied about how many college degrees they had or whatever that they said they had a master's degree, but they didn't. And it's now been five years and it's not the debate club, but I forget what it is, but something that requires some sort of intellect and he doesn't want to confront the group. And so he recreates everything that could possibly happen that day in order to make this easier. Or another one about having kids. Someone's really scared about making the decision about whether or not they want to have kids. So it's kind of a documentary, but it's not. It's awkward. It's weird, but it's so good. And then I would say White Lotus, just like so good.

Lenny (01:23:25):
I do that song to my new child often because it's so funny.

Gina Gotthilf (01:23:29):
My husband and I do it at home.

Lenny (01:23:30):
Lot is a recurring,

Gina Gotthilf (01:23:31):
Yeah,

Lenny (01:23:32):
Yeah. I'm not going to do it, but it's a recurring favorite on this podcast. So we had a short drinking game where every time someone said, White Lotus, we drink. So I'm going to have some tea here real quick.

Gina Gotthilf (01:23:41):
Okay. I'm sorry to be predictable, but like I said-

Lenny (01:23:45):
No its great.

Gina Gotthilf (01:23:47):
We humans are a lot more similar than we'd like to think. What's amazing Lenny is just my realization more and more of how much this is true because I like to think of myself as unique much like everybody else. And then I started seeing that all of these really creative decisions I made are what all of the other millennial white girls did. It's just fascinating. Oh, I like whatever, mid-century modern furniture. Oh, you know what? Actually, I'll tell you what movie is my favorite one? Bo Burnham's Inside. I love-

Lenny (01:24:19):
Oh my God,

Gina Gotthilf (01:24:20):
I don't know if that's a movie, but I'm in love with Bo Burnham. My husband knows about this. I know all of the songs and what is it? White Girl's, Instagram? White Woman's Instagram. Such a good song. That's what I'm talking about.

Lenny (01:24:33):
Also, I've been re-listening to How is the best case scenario, Joe Biden,

Gina Gotthilf (01:24:40):
They're going to make me vote for Joe Biden. I was singing this to my parents. They didn't get it.

Lenny (01:24:45):
That's amazing. We'll link to that video, that movie. It's even after COVID, it's incredible. Anyway, I was actually going to say that first show you mentioned, I think it's called The Rehearsal, maybe there's a different title.

Gina Gotthilf (01:24:57):
Oh my gosh, you're right. So he has two shows and one of them is called How To and the other one is called The Rehearsal. And you're right, I am recommending the rehearsal. I have also seen How To, which are shorter episodes where he films in New York and he just goes like How to find a parking spot. And then it takes him on this down a rabbit hole of how cars are made or parking in the city. But it's also very good. But I prefer The Rehearsal.

Lenny (01:25:22):
And Nathan Fielder's the guy behind all this who's incredibly hilarious. He has a new show, actually I think it's on HBO with John Wilson or something that he's producing or it's this other guy. He's going around talking about stuff in New York and I think he's a producer.

Gina Gotthilf (01:25:37):
That's the one I'm talking about. That's How To with John Wilson.

Lenny (01:25:41):
Oh, there we go. So I think he's behind that. Okay, look at us. We're figuring things out.

Gina Gotthilf (01:25:45):
We are figuring things out. So I think he has maybe a new season.

Lenny (01:25:48):
Think season two. I haven't started that one yet. Anyway, here we go. We're going to keep going. What is a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates that you're interviewing?

Gina Gotthilf (01:25:57):
Why do you want to work here is what I really like to ask because it tells me a lot. Of course, everyone wants a job. People could just be like, because I want a job and it seems like you guys pay well and whatever. I think this is a good next step in my career, but I want to know if this person knows what it is that we do, if they did a minimum level of research and if they connect with our mission because we're going to talk about mission a lot and I don't want them to gloss over it and to make decisions that are short-term thinking that go against our mission because of the reasons I mentioned with Duolingo. So I think that's one, it's not very unique, but I think gives you a lot of information. And then I would say, what are you world-class at and how do you know that you're at that?

(01:26:41):
And the second part is almost more important. What are you world class at? It's okay if someone says, look, I'm working on becoming world class at whatever, and this is why I think I'm great at it or whatever. But the second part is important because it tells me if people actually care about metrics, and I don't care what the metrics are, but just how do you know this to be true? It has to be more than like, "Oh, because my boss loves me," or "Because my mom told me," "because I gave a talk," or whatnot or whatever I want to hear, "I'm proud of having accomplished this." And maybe if you have some numbers to show, that's also really important.

Lenny (01:27:17):
What is a favorite product that you recently discovered that you really like?

Gina Gotthilf (01:27:21):
I have not been trying any products, I would say. So nothing to recommend. I would say though that I am very curious to try these gut health tests that are out there now or microbiome ones. I'm really interested in how little we know about our body and how tech can actually help democratize this information. And going on a tiny rant. I'm also feeling very resentful of doctors right now because we've always lived in a world in which doctors are sort of like these authorities and we must just believe whatever it is that they tell us, and we rely on them for information that is crucial to our survival.

(01:27:58):
But we're now in a world where we can Google things and that's even more scary because you have to know how to filter that information really well and you don't find explanations to things. But doctors don't like you Googling because they say it's scary, but also because they don't like being questioned. I think we're finally coming to a place where a lot of these devices that can give you great information about your body so that you understand your nutrition and very core things about ourselves that we don't today are becoming accessible to a lot of people just to the population. It's still expensive but we're getting there, and I think that will be magical. So I will call out the company Levels by my friend Sam Corcos because I think that what they're doing is awesome.

Lenny (01:28:40):
Next question. What is a favorite life motto that you like to think about? Come back to share with other people.

Gina Gotthilf (01:28:47):
One is "This too shall pass." And I will tell you this one right now is particularly meaningful to me right now because I'm going through a really tough moment because I have long COVID and lost my taste and smell, and it might be long-term. So, but I think it applies to the A/B thing that I was talking about when everything in life is moments except for a couple of diagnoses. And so, "This too shall pass," is something I say to myself a lot. The second one is also not particularly motivational, but I really believe in it, which is, "Fake it till you make it." That's something I've held onto for a long time. And even today, I don't mean lie. I don't mean pretend to be something that you're not, but it's almost like a way to overcome imposter syndrome and by opening rooms for yourself to be who you want to become so that you enable opportunities to become that.

(01:29:39):
And I'm not saying lying, but early in my career, I did fake it until I make it from the point of view of not saying no to things. When companies were saying to me being like, "Hey, can you help us grow without a budget like Tumblr," right? I was 25, 26. I was like, "Yeah, and then go figure it out." And when Duolingo turned to me and said, "Hey, can you be head of growth?" And I didn't know what growth was and I had to Google and find Andrew Chen's blog, I read it and I found out and I just said, "Yes," and then kept going with that. So fake it till you make it as kind of that for me.

(01:30:07):
But even today I have a lot of imposter syndrome, which I actually think is not imposter syndrome, is just acknowledging that I don't know a lot. My team says I have too much self-deprecating humor that actually puts the company down. It puts me down. So fake it till you make it to me means knowing how to stand in front of your team or a reporter or Lenny in a podcast and almost like being that person that you would like to be or being your best self. You could call it whatever you want, but I think it can really help you get out of the little hole that you would put yourself into and limit opportunities for yourself.

Lenny (01:30:44):
Amazing. This question elicits so many interesting insights and stories. I appreciate you sharing all that. Final question. You majored in philosophy, if I'm not mistaken. I'm curious, do you have a favorite philosopher or someone that most influenced the way you think about the world?

Gina Gotthilf (01:31:04):
I use a lot of philosophy in my day-to-day, but it's not because I have deep knowledge, it's because I have light knowledge that I draw on that helps people think I'm smart and relates to ideas. I often talk about Theseus's ship, to me that allegory is one of the most interesting ones because it's about identity and building and whether if the allegory is like the ship-

Lenny (01:31:04):
No, please share.

Gina Gotthilf (01:31:27):
So Theseus is on this journey. I think he leaves Crete and he's going somewhere else and he's on a boat. And then over the course of the trip so many things happen. They've hit so many waves and they have storms that they have to replace planks, and re-sow the sail and by the time they arrive at the next port, nothing on the ship is the same as it was before. They'd replace every single plank. They'd replace all the masts, they've replaced all the sails. And so the question is, is this the same boat that left the dock? And to me, that's a really interesting concept around transformation and what it means to have an identity that exists over time, even when so much of us or so much of a company or so much of a country changes, and what is that core identity?

(01:32:14):
And to me that shapes I think a lot of ideas because it's a cool allegory and it resonates a lot. But yeah, so I would say at this point I embarrassingly have very cursory knowledge of philosophy. I could probably remember a lot of it if I went back to it, but I don't use it in my day-to-day, and I would love to take time off at some point and go study, but I'm also embarrassed to admit that I'm not a person who just finishes work is completely depleted and then wants to bury my face in a philosophy book. I would like to acquire all of this philosophy knowledge, but I want to watch White Lotus. Or if I'm going to force myself to work out, I'll listen to an audio book that makes me feel good about myself, and it's a fiction one.

Lenny (01:33:01):
I think this is actually a great example of exactly what you're talking about, where we change and we are not necessarily the same person we were. That makes sense that you're not obsessed with philosophy having finished that a while ago and now working on something totally different.

Gina Gotthilf (01:33:16):
Yeah, I think I still am because I consider myself to be very existential. I'm an atheist, so I like to find meaning. It's not like it doesn't exist so much for me, and I think about the big questions and I am interested in philosophy. I'm just not interested enough to make time and effort for it in my life right now.

Lenny (01:33:34):
As a hidden gem. At the end of this episode, I'll share, I'm also an atheist and I actually ran a website called atheistspot.com. It was like a Reddit for atheist news. I went to conferences.

Gina Gotthilf (01:33:45):
What does it do? We didn't see God again today, still no God to be found.

Lenny (01:33:53):
Yep. The funniest thing is we had Google AdWords on there and the ads were based on the stories around different religions, and it says all like christianmingle.com, the atheistspot.com. Anyway, Gina, we covered so much ground. What an amazing episode. I learned a ton from you. I'm so excited for people to hear this. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and how can listeners be useful to you?

Gina Gotthilf (01:34:18):
Yes. Okay. Thanks, Lenny. So people can find me online if you want to see just ridiculous posts. That's where my Instagram is, and my Instagram is impressive because I'm Gina on Instagram. Yes, I am just Gina.

Lenny (01:34:30):
Wow.

Gina Gotthilf (01:34:31):
So that's super impressive. You won't even find it when you look for me because you'll see all these other Gina's, but it's just at Gina. That's me. I do share some professional things as well there too, but I think it's my more entertaining channel. You can find me on LinkedIn. I'm a little more serious on LinkedIn. I have a photo with Obama, which will certainly impress you, so find me. Gina Gotthilf on LinkedIn.

Lenny (01:34:51):
So many stories we haven't covered.

Gina Gotthilf (01:34:52):
I know I'm Gina G on Twitter, and that's probably, you know what? I did a Harry Stebbings podcast and then that got me 600 followers on TikTok, but I've never posted, but maybe at some point. I feel self-conscious, but I think I could be a good TikToker because I think I'm amusing.

Lenny (01:35:08):
Well, you're not going to get followers by saying there's nothing good there. I think if you want people, they'll follow you. You should tell them it's going to be great there.

Gina Gotthilf (01:35:15):
Come see my amazing contact content on TikTok. I will definitely start posting it soon, and you can influence what kind of content will be there because I'm listening to my followers right now, and then how you can be useful. Look, if you know of an amazing founder in Latin America, if you are an amazing founder in Latin America, or if you are in touch with VCs who are interested in this, then definitely tell them about Latitud. You go to latitud.com. Do not misspell Latitud. It doesn't have an E at the end. That's because latitude in Spanish is latitud. However, it's also because we couldn't buy latitude.com with an E, but now that's what it is and it's grown a ton, so get in touch, join the fellowship, join our community. We're particularly useful by the way to us people who are interested in getting plugged into Latin America, because if you get in, you just meet all the top people in one fell swoop, and that helps you make friends relationships, find clients, find your business partners, and understand the ecosystem in a hacky way.

Lenny (01:36:16):
Amazing. Gina, thank you so much for being here. Bye everyone.

Gina Gotthilf (01:36:21):
Goodbye everyone.

Lenny (01:36:24):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Grant Lee (00:00:00):
I'm in my third pitch in, I get to the very end of the pitch, feeling pretty good about myself. The investor pauses a little bit, and then just says, "That has to be the worst pitch, worst idea I have ever heard. Not only are you trying to go against incumbents, you're going against incumbents that have massive distribution. You are never going to succeed."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:18):
You guys are at over 100 million ARR now, worth over $2 billion. One of the most interesting ways you guys grew early on was influencer marketing.

Grant Lee (00:00:25):
All the initial influencers, I onboarded manually myself. I would jump on a call with each one of them so that they understood what Gamma represented, how to use the product. You want to be able to have them tell you story but in their voice. I think a lot of people think influencer marketing and they'll think these big trendy creators, people that have a million followers. This is the wrong approach. You basically give them a script to read, immediately feels like an ad. That product is not connected really to them in any way. You're much better doing the hard thing, which is hard to scale, finding the thousands of micro influencers that have an audience where your product maybe is actually useful. People really trust what they say. That ends up becoming this wildfire that can spread really, really fast.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:04):
Something you talk about it, there is actually a lot of ways to think experimentally, even in the early stages.

Grant Lee (00:01:08):
We would have an idea in the morning, come up with some sort of functional prototype, recruit a bunch of people that are legitimately good prospective users, but have zero skin in the game, ship fast so people can start playing with it. In the afternoon, we're already running pretty full scale experiment. You start actually hearing other people describe their usage of the product. We can also watch them struggle. By the evening or by the next day. We can actually go through all of it together and say, okay, we're going back and we have to fix this. This is not usable and we've done that for everything.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:36):
Today my guest is Grant Lee, CEO and co-founder of Gamma. This is a really unique and inspiring, and very tactically useful conversation because Grant is building something that is essentially the dream for most founders. A massive AI startup that's profitable, and has been for a long time, that didn't raise a lot of money for a long time. And as a small team, it's just around 30 people, all who can fit in a small restaurant serving over 50 million users globally.

(00:02:02):
If you're not familiar with Gamma, they're an AI powered presentation and website design tool. They just hit 100 million ARR in just over two years. They're valued at over $2 billion. And unlike a lot of the fast growing AI startups that you hear about, they're growing profitably and sustainably, and in a category that most people did not believe had a huge business opportunity. As you'll hear in the conversation, one investor told Grant, this is the dumbest idea that he has ever heard.

(00:02:29):
In this conversation, Grant shares the very counter-intuitive lessons that he's learned, finding product market fit, how he knew they had product market fit, the specific tactics that helped them grow, including a deep dive into influencer marketing, which blew my mind. Also how they figured out their price, his thoughts on building a GPT wrapper company that is durable, a ton of hiring advice, and so much more. This could honestly have been another two hours of conversation. I suspect we'll do another follow-up conversation next year.

(00:02:56):
If you love this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It helps tremendously. And if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 16 incredible products, including Devin, Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD, and Mobbin. Head on over to lennysnewsletter.com and click product pass. With that, I bring you Grant Lee after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:03:29):
My podcasts guest and I love talking about craft and taste and agency and product market fit. You know what we don't love talking? About SOC 2. That's where Vanta comes in. Vanta helps companies of all sizes get complying fast and stay that way with industry-leading AI automation and continuous monitoring. Whether you're a startup tackling your first SOC 2 or ISO 27001, or an enterprise managing vendor risk, Vanta's trust management platform makes it quicker, easier, and more scalable. Vanta also helps you complete security questionnaires up to five times faster so that you can win bigger deals sooner. The result, according to a recent IDC study, Vanta customers slashed over $500,000 a year and are three times more productive. Establishing trust isn't optional. Vanta makes it automatic. Get $1,000 off at vanta.com/lenny.

(00:04:24):
Did you know that I have a whole team that helps me with my podcast and with my newsletter. I want everyone on that team to be super happy and thrive in the roles. Justworks knows that your employees are more than just your employees. They're your people. My team is spread out across Colorado, Australia, Nepal, West Africa, and San Francisco. My life would be so incredibly complicated to hire people internationally, to pay people on time, and in their local currencies, and to answer their HR questions 24/7. But with Justworks, it's super easy. Whether you're setting up your own automated payroll, offering premium benefits, or hiring internationally. Justworks offer simple software and 24/7 human support from small business experts for you and your people. They do your human resources right so that you can do right by your people. Justworks, for your people. Grant, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Grant Lee (00:05:19):
Lenny, it's so great to be here. Thank you for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:21):
I see your face all the time in my LinkedIn feed. I don't know if you know this is a thing. On these JPMorgan Chase ads. I'm so curious if other people see this or if it's just me. Did you know this was a thing?

Grant Lee (00:05:31):
I think it's maybe once a day now I get a text message and just no message. It's just a screenshot or an image of me doing something in San Francisco on one of these ads that we're seeing. And so yeah, kind of embarrassing, but also we're happy customers of JPMorgan Chase, so trying to represent.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:49):
Oh my God, I hope you love them. Because it's always you. There's no one else. It's like Grant.

Grant Lee (00:05:54):
I know. Can I talk to you [inaudible 00:05:56] swap somebody out. I mean that'd be great. I'm totally fine with that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:59):
Okay, so to get serious, the reason I'm really excited to have you here is, unlike a lot of super fast growing AI startups, you are both growing like crazy, you are growing very profitably. We're going to talk about this. You did not raise a ton of money when you started. You waited a long time to raise a bunch of money. You also built a business in a category that I think most people never imagined there was this big of an opportunity. And you're basically, you've achieved the dream of a lot of founders these days, especially people building AI startups.

(00:06:31):
So my goal with this conversation is essentially do an anthropological study of a really successful AI startup. Talk about how you found product market fit, how you grew, all the lessons you've learned along the journey. And I'm going to break this conversation up kind of along the different milestones of the journey. Before we get into the first piece, is there anything that you think is important for people to hear broadly about the story of Gamma?

Grant Lee (00:06:57):
Yeah. Maybe I'll just start with a quick story if that's okay. And it's really just the founding story. So we started the company back in 2020. This is peak pandemic. And even fundraising was just so different. So all of the fundraising was done over Zoom. You were kind of sitting in these Zoom meetings trying to pitch. Many investors you never met in person. So just a different era. And so for us, we're first time founders. I was actually living in London at the time, and so different time zone. I had to do all of my pitches at night. And I have two little kids, so wait for them to go to bed. 8:00 PM. We had a pretty modest flat, so nothing big. I would basically find this little corner between the kitchenette and the laundry room to kind of set up shot, far enough from the kids so they wouldn't be woken up.

(00:07:45):
In between 8:00 PM and like 2:00 AM, I'm just pitching. Trying my best. I had the fake Zoom background so people didn't know where I was, and just pitching. And so really the first day, I'm in my third pitch in, trying to tell the story of Gamma, obviously just starting to get the hang of the pitch. And I get to the very end of the pitch feeling pretty good about myself. And the investor pauses a little bit, and then just says, "That has to be the worst pitch, worst idea I have ever heard. Not only are you trying to go against incumbents, you're going against incumbents that have massive distribution. You are never going to succeed."

(00:08:23):
And so in my head, I'm already kind of shell shocked and thinking what's my rebuttal? And before I could even respond, he hangs up. And so I'm there sitting there thinking about it. And before I could really get down on myself because I had to prepare for the next pitch, I just internalize this feeling that maybe he's right. Maybe something about what he's saying is actually correct. And so for me, I started thinking about, if we're going to succeed in this category, we're going to really have to think about growth from the very beginning. This category is going to be really, really hard to break into.

(00:08:58):
And so we really kind of made this sort of promise to ourselves, that as we continue to build, growth was going to be critically important. And so my thing to your audience is that I don't come from a growth background. So if I can learn growth, anybody can learn growth. And I think especially in this sort of market, hyper competitive, oftentimes very crowded, it's going to be essential.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:19):
That is such a fun story. Oh my god. How bad must this investor feel at this point. We won't name names. Just to share some stats, I know this is going to be by the time this launches, this will be out, but you guys are at over 100 million ARR now, worth over $2 billion. A business that, again, most people did not think was going to work in this category.

Grant Lee (00:09:41):
Yeah, thank you. Yeah, we feel super proud to have accomplished that. And again, yeah, I'm excited to share some of the growth tactics and things that worked for us because I think hopefully it'll help others kind of on their journey as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:53):
Okay. So let's dive into it. Let's talk about product market fit. Tell us the story of just how you found product market fit, and how you knew you found product market fit.

Grant Lee (00:10:02):
Yeah. I'll start by telling kind of the moment where we thought we maybe had product market fit. And I think a lot of founders ask themselves, do we have it or are we not? And I think there's often a sort of temptation to kind of almost fool yourself into thinking you have it. And so we sort of did our first public beta launch, this is back in August of 2022. We launched on Product Hunt, and felt really good. We had what we felt like was a great launch, ended up winning product of the day, product of the week, product of the month. And it was like, wow, I think we have something here.

(00:10:32):
And then we'd look at signups, and you'd get that initial spike in signups, and then they sort of flatten out. We were still getting new users every day, but it was clear we didn't have strong word of mouth. There wasn't strong organic virality. And so if we just kind of played things out, we knew that the product wasn't going to grow on its own. Something was missing there. We didn't have that strong word of mouth so that the product could just continue growing.

(00:10:55):
And so we really asked ourselves, okay, what do we need to change? And the answer is we need to fundamentally change everything. It for us almost became this sort of bet the company sort of moment. Because at that point we were running low on runway. We knew we needed to make progress and we didn't really know what could be done. And so we got everyone together. At this point, the team was just over 12 people. And we said, okay, it's going to be all hands on deck.

(00:11:22):
We are going to do everything we possibly can to make the first 30 seconds of the product feel magical. The moment you land into the product, it has to be great, and it has to be so great that someone that goes through that onboarding is going to tell all their friends. And if we can get that right, then maybe we have a chance at actually doing something in this space. And so we spent three, four months actually after the product launch, we felt great, but we knew we had to go back to the drawing board.

(00:11:48):
We spent the next three, four months actually revamping the entire onboarding experience. And of course, this is also where AI for us kind of played a big role. We actually rebuilt it so that AI was part of the actual onboarding. So every single new user would experience this sort of magic in the first 30 seconds. And so we relaunched, this is end of March 2023. And all of a sudden, we'd go from a few hundred signups a day to now first day it was like a couple thousand, and then the next day would be like 5,000 signups, and then 10,000 signups a day, and then 20,000 signups a day.

(00:12:21):
And then it just kept going up. And we weren't doing any sort of marketing, no advertising. It was all sort of organic word of mouth virality of the product, people using the product and sharing it with others, where we for the first time really felt this pull. We didn't have to do anything. Product was just growing. And it was just such a distinct difference between that feeling and coming out of the Product Hunt launch where we could have fooled ourselves into thinking we have product market fit. I think the temptation would've been, hey, let's just spend more on ads or spend more on marketing. Because we'll just fuel the top of the funnel and everything else will work itself out.

(00:12:53):
I think that would've been a trap. I think that would've led us down to this path of trying to brute force our way into product market fit. And it would just always be sort of a fleeting sort of destination. We would never actually arrive. And so I think we made the tough call, the right call. It was a sort of bet the company moment, and I think on the other side it just felt so different.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:11):
Grant, this is exactly what I wanted this conversation to be. I'm so excited. I have so many questions I have to follow up on the stuff you shared before we even get to the rest of the journey. So one is essentially what you're describing is product market fit to you was when organic growth started to really take off, and it was just growing through word of mouth. You weren't doing much because it was so awesome, people were telling their friends about it. Is there anything more there that might be helpful for people to share just to hear about just like, okay, here's what it actually looks like?

Grant Lee (00:13:38):
Yeah, I mean my one piece of advice is when you're early on, your mindset should almost be like you're trying to create a word of mouth machine. If you can get that part right, everything else becomes significantly easier. And if you have any, and I think this applies to both prosumer, B2C, as well as even B2B products, if you have a B2B product, even if you're not telling all of your friends, you should be telling colleagues where that product is relevant. You should probably be telling former coworkers where, hey, you've discovered something like, oh, I wish we had this in our prior lives, and that should even be magical.

(00:14:14):
And then you should see that in all the leads that are coming through or people coming through through your prospects and your existing customers. If you're not seeing a healthy chunk of those leads come through that way, I would go back. I'm like, why? Why is that not happening? Because again, that's the massive tailwind you need where every single thing you do on top of that, all the marketing, all the sales, all the advertising, you're just going to have it becomes way, way easier.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:36):
How much of this was, you described it as a word of mouth machine, how much of this was word of mouth loops and virality features versus just the product itself? One was awesome and two is kind of innately shareable because it's presentations people share with each other.

Grant Lee (00:14:50):
Yeah, totally. I think for us, we do benefit from being in a category where, by nature of it, if you like Gamma, you're sharing it, presenting it to others. So I think for us it's a combination of both. And ideally, you have other ways where word of mouth or organic virality can happen in your product. So by nature of usage, like it's being shared.

(00:15:09):
We basically had an internal mantra that, we go back to the first 30 seconds, we want it to be dead simple for someone to create content, we want to be dead simple for them to share it. And everything we did for that first 30 seconds, or call it the first few minutes, is remove friction so that they can do both of those things. Create and share. And I think other people, when you look at your own product, you think about, okay, what is it about my product and how it gets used? Can you remove friction such that it can actually spread, and even if it's locally within an organization or within a workspace, just be able to enable that as much as you possibly can.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:43):
The other really profound point you're making here is the story of you won product of the day on Product Hunt, which alone is so hard. So many people try to win and don't. Most people don't. I've tried to help companies win, and it's a really hard thing to achieve. And then you won product of the week and product of the month, and still you're like, no, this isn't working. Most people that achieve that are like, no, we got this, and they would not have to bet the company. There wouldn't be a feeling that we have to rethink everything. What is it there that you're just like, no, this isn't going to work, as much as exciting as this is, this isn't it?

Grant Lee (00:16:20):
Yeah, I mean part of being a founder is being as self-aware as you can and be your own worst critic. And so oftentimes you want to have these vanity metrics that feel good to celebrate, and you should celebrate. But you should know when it's a vanity metric versus is this core to our growth engine? If this number goes up, does it mean the product is working? And I think that's where we looked at, okay, it felt good to win those things. We kind of put ourselves at least on the map. But it wasn't good enough to actually have this sort of feeling that we had a core growth engine we could just invest in and get better and better. That wasn't there yet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:53):
So essentially it kind of started to just plateau and slow. It wasn't like this rocket ship that took off from that point.

Grant Lee (00:17:00):
Yeah, it was still like we were still getting signups. They were coming through. But you could just tell there wasn't this building momentum. And I think that's where it's always hard to tell. You have to, me and my co-founders, we sat down, we're trying to be honest with ourselves. Okay, is this going to be enough? And it just really felt like it wasn't going to be good.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:17):
The other point here is the power of onboarding, which comes up a bunch on this podcast when you talk about driving retention. So you launched Product Hunt, did great and then started kind of petering out. How much did the product change after things started to work versus onboarding? Just like how important was onboarding? And then just tell us why the first 30 seconds, where'd you come up with that number?

Grant Lee (00:17:41):
Yeah. So for us, the onboarding and the product experience, for us that's intertwined. The analogy I always think about is if you go into a restaurant and maybe the food is good, but when you really think about the user experience, it's like the moment you walk into the door, you get seated, the waitress, waiter comes by, greets you, you can order. And of course the food has to taste good. And then you finally get the bill and you leave. Is that entire experience something that feels delightful? Is it good enough for you to tell your friends about? If someone just came by and dropped the food on your plate on the table, and just left and never came with a bill, I'm like, okay, maybe I'm not going to recommend this to somebody else.

(00:18:18):
And so for us, we thought about, okay, the first moment someone walks through our door, dropping into the product, what is something we can give them? Can we shorten that time to value as much as possible? A lot of this is inspired by Scott Belsky, he talks about that first mile, the first 15 minutes. And I think that's totally right. And I think one approach is you think about new users as you almost have a cynical view of them. You have to think about them being selfish, vain, and lazy, right? They're coming in, they have no desire to learn a new tool.

(00:18:48):
And so what can you give them in that first 30 seconds that earns you the next 30 seconds and then the next 30 seconds? And so for us, we knew that if we can't, people's attention span is even shorter to today than maybe 10 years ago, and so what is it in that first 30 seconds, can we actually show you something and earn the right to keep building that relationship with you? We really thought a lot about that, and certainly that's all we could really afford at the time. We only had 12 people building. It's like we couldn't make an entirely revamp the entire product. We knew that we had to least put all of our energy into one spot, and so we made that coming into the door, come through the door, make that moment feel magical so that we can do a little bit more over time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:27):
I love your point about how you could think of it as like, okay, it's onboarding versus the product. The lens of how do we make this incredibly valuable and aha-ish for the first 30 seconds almost informs what the product should be.

Grant Lee (00:19:39):
Yeah. It really helps you pull forward what is the most magical thing about your product. Sometimes founders will think about the five, 10 features. Well, maybe there's only one thing that kind of differentiates you. I try to learn a lot from, we'll get into some of the marketing pieces of this, but even just having this sort of founder led marketing lens of what can I do to help a new user just understand. There's this thing from consumer advertising, which is you throw a consumer one egg, they can probably catch it. You throw them four or five eggs, they're probably going to drop all of them.

(00:20:12):
And oftentimes founders want to talk about the four or five features they have, maybe 10 features. And then the consumer is totally confused, like why do I need this thing? We try to just give them that one egg, that one first experience. We're like, okay, create a slide in seconds. That's the egg. I'm going to throw you this egg. Is that compelling to you? Some people are still going to opt out, but for the people that catch that, you're solving a real problem for them, and then you can continue building on that over time. You've given them enough so that they'll sit around and keep playing with your product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:41):
That is a hilarious metaphor I've never heard for onboarding time to value, just focus on one egg at a time. Just going even further back, what was the original insight that you had that led to Gamma and what Gamma is today?

Grant Lee (00:20:55):
After the last startup I was at was acquired, I went back into kind of my roots, which is consulting. I was advising early stage startups. And the sort of medium I was using was Google Slides. So I just remember this late night trying to prepare for next day's meeting, trying to format and figure out the right layout, and spending hours just trying to get the sort of look and feel right, rather than the content itself. And for me, that just felt completely backwards. I should be spending 90% of the time on the content, 10% maybe on the design and formatting.

(00:21:25):
And so the question just was what if there's a better way? What if we could reimagine this format from the ground up? Slides have been around for almost 40 years as the default medium of choice for a lot of this. And so we thought about, okay, if we had different building blocks, different primitives, so you're not locked into the fixed 16 by nine slide, what could we offer to users? And so that was really the starting point of all this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:48):
Hearing this, I could see why investors would be like, I guess so. But slides has been around, PowerPoint has been around 40 years. I get it. I get why people would be... And specifically AI, was that a part of the vision initially, or did AI start to come up, and then wow, great timing,

Grant Lee (00:22:04):
Great timing. It wasn't part of the original vision, although the spirit was there, which is we wanted to make it incredibly fast and effortless for people to create content. So it just so happened that AI was a magical gift that allowed us to do all those things along the same sort of ambition or vision that we had. And so we integrated it core to all the building blocks we were already building well before AI was part of the picture.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:27):
It's such a cool other example. There's just so many examples of ideas that were not possible before are now very possible with AI. And it's a great opportunity for people to come after as these places, categories, people think is an impossible place to build a big business. AI now allows it. Awesome.

(00:22:43):
Speaking of that, let's talk about the growth journey, and how you actually grew from nothing to 100 million ARR in just over two years. I'm thinking we break it up. I know these milestones aren't that clear, but kind of like zero to 100 million ARR, one to 10, 10 to 100, something like that. And let's just see how it goes. How did you get your first set of users? How'd you get your, say, first 100 users? How'd you get to 100 million ARR from zero?

Grant Lee (00:23:10):
Our first 100 looks very different, I'd say. So this was even pre this sort of AI launch we had. The first 100 users for a product like ours, you're trying to convince all your friends to use the product. Anybody that's ever made a slide deck, you're trying to talk to. And I think early on, your friends want to do you a favor, so they're going to try the product. They're also going to lie to you. They're going to tell you how great it is. And then you look at the usage and nobody's coming back.

(00:23:33):
And so I think our first 100 was sort of gradually hard-earned post the product launch, people learning like, okay, this is kind of becoming a little bit more useful. Usage was still pretty episodic, so they weren't coming back every week. And then I do think the moment post the AI launch is where all of a sudden we saw that sort of organic growth happening, people coming back to the product regularly. And so that's where, it wasn't even the first hundred, it was like probably the first 10,000 users all came within a pretty short time period after that initial launch.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:02):
Awesome. We're going to talk about monetization pricing later, which is obviously an important part of actual getting to million ARR and 10 million AAR. So what I'm hearing essentially is the Product Hunt launch was a big part of just the first 10,000-ish users. I know there was also a tweet when you relaunched that helped in a big way. Talk about that.

Grant Lee (00:24:24):
Yeah. So when we did our AI launch, we didn't do our AI launch on Product Hunt. We basically said, hey, let's just put it out on Twitter, see if we can get some virality. And honestly, we kind came up with kind of a clickbaity sort of tweet. It was like the most valuable skill in business is about to become obsolete. And so it was intentional in that we wanted to create a little bit of engagement. We knew that having sort of a more provocative in a tweet would allow people to engage with it.

(00:24:54):
And so after a couple of days, all of a sudden it started getting a little bit more viral and a lot more engagement. And we looked and it was basically because Paul Graham had commented and saying something like, "Surely, the thing that the slide deck is describing is more valuable than the slide itself." And obviously it was fun just to see that comment. I think once that comment came through, even more engagement on the post. And then that was really the whole intent of that post was just to be able to have that level of engagement so that people, it would have some level of reach.

(00:25:24):
And so for me, it was almost like my first learning moment, going back to what does founder led marketing even mean? It means how do you actually break through the noise? How do you get a chance to have people even engage with a post like that? Part of that is copywriting, part of that is storytelling. Part of that is just having even the right visuals to share. And so it was for me kind of a moment just understanding, hey, to kind of do this right, you kind of have to do things that maybe you're not super comfortable with, but it makes a difference.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:52):
Such a fun story. So you intentionally set that announcement up to be controversial is what I'm hearing?

Grant Lee (00:25:58):
Totally. Yeah. I'd say provocative. A little spicy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:01):
That is so cool. So essentially you got to 10,000 users through Product Hunt, and then essentially one controversial tweet that ended up baiting Paul Graham to comment.

Grant Lee (00:26:11):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:12):
Amazing. And it was just a comment. It wasn't even him retweeting it.

Grant Lee (00:26:16):
No, just a comment. And then others would pile on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:19):
Yeah. It's interesting how much a comment can increase the distribution of a tweet versus them retweeting it or quote tweeting it.

Grant Lee (00:26:26):
Totally. And of course the algorithm change all the time. So part of it was just luck based on when it happened, how it happened, who posted.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:32):
And you use this term founder led marketing, which I love, and I'm already seeing it in action here. This is you thinking about, it's not delegating to someone in marketing, it's not hiring an agency, it's like how do I tell a story that I think will break through the noise based on you building this company, having the insight to build this product. And I guess is there anything more there you think is important for people to hear about the importance of the founder thinking through this stuff?

Grant Lee (00:26:56):
Yeah. I mean, I think most people today are probably familiar with founder-led sales, which is still very, very important. I think before you hire your first salesperson or AE, it's great for the founder to understand what it takes. And they're going to craft the right narrative, the right story. At my previous role, I was the COO at a startup where I was doing a lot of, I wasn't founder, but I was early. And so I was helping the founders go through this, and really helping go into meetings with a client or a prospect and saying, "Hey, this is why our product is interesting."

(00:27:26):
And I think today there's so many AI startups that are much more either B2C or prosumer. And so you're not necessarily talking to individual prospects, but the idea that you can be really in control of the narrative on the marketing side is really, really important. And I think I'll describe a few things where, over time, I think that skill set just really, really helps you.

(00:27:48):
One is you have a chance to be a creator yourself these days. I think a lot of founders are trying to be more active on social media. And I think if you can kind of overcome the initial cringe factor of seeing yourself and postings like, oh, this doesn't feel authentic, if you can overcome that initial feeling, you start investing into like, okay, how do I become a better copywriter? How do I articulate something that is clear, not just clever? I think there's that saying where obviously if you can have that clarity, that's super important. And most people will try to get super creative with their copywriting, but that's not usually the right way to break through and communicate something. So how do you improve your own copywriting?

(00:28:27):
And then that allows you to actually have a higher bar when you start working with other marketers, or in this case for us, working with influencers. If you're working with influencers and creators, and you can totally empathize with how they approach that work, and you know what a good hook looks like or you know how to structure a good post, you can only do that if you've gone through it a little bit yourself and you know how hard it is. And I think too many founders will then just say, they'll write something that just feels so much like an ad, and then they'll give it to a creator to help amplify. And then that just never works. And so I do think part of founder-led marketing is going through this yourself.

Grant Lee (00:29:00):
And so I do think part of founder-led marketing is going through this yourself, using your own platform. In the beginning it's probably going to be super small. But as you get bigger, you have a platform to ... You have a voice and people listen. And you're going to get better and better at your own storytelling. I think these are all skills you should invest in as early as possible, because you know you're going to have to get better and better. It's like practice, you got to practice over and over.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:21):
I definitely want to pull on this thread more because you tweeting the lessons you learned building Gamma is what led to this conversation. I was reading, I'm like, " Okay, he's sharing a bunch of stuff, but there's so much more I want to hear." And we're going to talk through this and go in a lot more depth than what you've shared on Twitter. But I love that that's example of that working, having this conversation.

(00:29:41):
So let me ask a couple of questions here. One is just how do you find time as a founder or CEO of a very fast growing crazy startup? We have so much to do. How do you just allocate the time to do this? And then any just key lessons you've learned about doing this well, beyond what you've already shared for people that want to try to start sharing things on LinkedIn and Twitter?

Grant Lee (00:30:00):
My advice is definitely just to try to start small. Don't let it become so intimidating that you just don't get started. For me, it was like just having a notepad or a Google Doc around in the beginning where I would just constantly jot down, okay, this is something I learned or something I observed or something that worked well, something that was unintuitive but worked, and just start creating a log of that. And then once I had enough of those, and I'd spend basically every week, I'd block off a few hours to go a little bit deeper. I'd take a lot of those bullet points and try to say, "Is there enough here to turn this into maybe a post or something that can be shared broadly?" And in the beginning I didn't have enough. It was all sort of scattered thoughts. But over time you start accumulating some interesting themes. And then I would start stress testing some of that.

(00:30:45):
So I would tell my teammates like, "Hey, this is something interesting. Do you find this interesting?" And if there were enough like, "Oh yeah, I would not have expected that", or, "That's not something I've ever heard before," then I'd actually start crafting the initial post. And then you actually just put it out there. I think what I've learned is, even for LinkedIn versus Twitter, the audiences want different things. And so you almost have to then have different tones of voices or even nuggets or sharing. For me, I invested much more in LinkedIn early on just because it felt a little bit more natural for me. And then over time I said, "Okay, well I'm going to start packaging certain content for Twitter that's actually different than what I would post on LinkedIn." Sometimes on Twitter you get even more tactical or even more into the weeds. And so I found that to be helpful.

(00:31:27):
But honestly, I'm still learning. And so every time you post, you go back, after a couple of weeks you go and say, "Okay, what things are actually being engaged with? Are things actually creating ..." Ideally you're creating enough value where people are either bookmarking it, sharing it, retweeting it, these things that are signals for there's something valuable there. And then you just go back and you start collecting your own sort of, these are my all-star posts, these are the ones that I've actually broken through. And then you go back and try to understand, okay, what about that post do I think was actually useful? Was it the actual content? Was it the structure of the content? Was it some sort of contrarian advice? And you start thematically bunching that together such that as you're brainstorming every week, you just have a good sort of body of work to work off.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:10):
This is so interesting and valuable. So let me mirror back a few of the lessons that I heard here that I think is easy for people to miss. So one is just what to share. What I heard here, and I completely agree with this, and this is what I try to do, is pay attention to things you've learned, things that you find interesting, things that are unintuitive to you. Just have a doc and just put these there. And every time you learn something, find something interesting, just add it to the doc. Or yeah, I haven't heard before is a good one too.

(00:32:39):
So it's essentially just like if you find it interesting, people on social media will also find it interesting. And one approach is just share it as it's happening, which is what I try to do. Just like, "Oh hey, just learned this thing with with clock code. Check it out." Or save it up for a big long post. The other interesting, I've never heard this before, of post different things to LinkedIn and Twitter. I just copy and paste the same thing. I love that you do something different for the two platforms.

Grant Lee (00:33:05):
I think we all kind of have intuition that there's just different audiences, right? And so if you know that kind of fundamentally, then the question is how do you package up the story the right way so that the audience is ready to receive it? And I think this can differ by the type of creator or the founder, whoever's posting it, and of course the actual content itself. And so for me, I'm still tweaking, but I do find that just copy and pasting from one to the other doesn't usually work. You almost need to be in the right mindset of, okay, what do I think will be more engaging on Twitter? And then what do I think will be more engaging on LinkedIn? And then test a bunch, see what actually works. Go back and iterate a little bit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:49):
So if you had one bullet point tip for what works on Twitter versus LinkedIn, you shared maybe more tactical on Twitter, is there anything more there you can share?

Grant Lee (00:33:56):
Yeah, that's what I've found is tactical, oftentimes more contrarian on Twitter. And also I would say technical too. People really like to know, again, going back to getting into the weeds, is this something I feel like I could replicate? And I'm not going to give you ... There's no credibility if you just give a blanket statement or something that feels generic. I really need to know, if you could show me the metrics, even better. I feel like that ...

(00:34:22):
Versus LinkedIn, it's oftentimes more even just either more aspirational or aspirational or a topic or a theme that just feels relevant at that point in time. And you can just kind of make more of a broader statement. It doesn't need to be as tactical. It's more like inspirational, is like, "Oh, okay, now I need to go and learn a little bit more about pricing and packaging," for instance. And that could be the sort of spark that somebody needs. And you don't need to spell it completely out. Part of it's also that on LinkedIn you can't really do threads. And so doing a super long form post isn't as practical. Maybe that changes in the future, where maybe the tactical pieces, that element might actually change.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:01):
And last piece is you said you just block off time. Is there a specific time of the week you do this? How do you actually ... Because everyone's like, "Oh sure, I'll block off time. And then, I don't know, okay, but I actually got to do all this other stuff so I'm not going to use it this time or maybe next week."

Grant Lee (00:35:12):
For me, it's usually two times of the day, very first thing in the morning and last thing at night. And partly it's because of kids. It's almost like I need time where there's just zero distraction and there's no noise in the house, and so I can actually think. And then I think in the mornings it's about where are you finding inspiration, what are topics you're energized by? And then I think at night it's about reflection. What are the things you actually went through that day? You can almost pull up your calendar and be like, "Okay, I talked to X, Y and Z people. And was there anything from those conversations that might be relevant?" That's where I write some of those things. It's more of a recap of actually what happened.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:50):
And what helps me to not feel like this is some cringey self-promo egotistical stuff is just it's useful stuff that I've learned that ends up being helpful to people. And people in the comments are always just like, "Oh, that is really cool and useful. Thank you." It's not like self-promotion-

Grant Lee (00:35:51):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:05):
... it's not just like, "Look how amazing I am. Check out my amazing products." Like, "Here's a thing I learned. You might find it useful."

Grant Lee (00:36:11):
That's exactly right. I think one way of thinking about it, with founder-led sales, it's always about exchange of value, right? You want to be able to give the customer this feeling that they're getting an amazing product. In exchange they're going to pay you money for it. I think with founder-led marketing, it's almost this mindset of you want to give people a ton of content, maybe it's a value in the content, so you're sharing something, maybe some secret tactic or you're giving them something where inherently there's value in it, and in exchange you sort of get goodwill back. You're not necessarily getting money back, you get goodwill. They're going to follow you, they're going to engage with your post, they're going to tell others about it. And then over time you can exchange maybe some of that goodwill for actually talking about my product and announcing it and they're going to help amplify the news. And I think that's magic, where you kind of bank the goodwill for a long period of time by providing just a ton of value with no expectation of anything immediately in return.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:06):
The book I always point people to when they're struggling with this sort of thing and like, "Okay, I did this and no one cared, didn't do any good," is there's a book by Scott Pressfield, I think is his name, called Nobody Wants to Read Your Shit, which is exactly what is right. Nobody wants to read it. The bar for people to care is very high. There's so much stuff to read and process. And so this book gives you a really good lens of just like, okay, the bar is very high and nobody wants to read your shit, so you have to try really hard to make it really good.

Grant Lee (00:37:38):
Great reminder.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:39):
We'll link to that in the show notes. Okay, let's come back to the growth of Gamma. So we've talked about how you got your first tens of thousands of users, essentially product hunts, rethinking, onboarding, making it really magical, and then this very controversial tweet that Paul Graham commented, created some buzz. Let's talk about the next phase and maybe, I don't know, tell us kind of the ARR at that point through 100 million. Just broadly, what should we know?

Grant Lee (00:38:07):
So when we got to about 10 million in ARR, I think there was this feeling for me, which was we knew we needed ways to help just continue to amplify and spread the word about Gamma. I think it was already working in terms of the organic virality was there, and so we did feel like it was time to start amplifying some of this. And I think the main blocker of my mind that I started feeling was that our initial brand was holding us back. And I think a lot of people will discount whether or not a rebrand is valuable. And I think sometimes it is, sometimes it isn't.

(00:38:39):
For us, there's a few different things we looked at. So one, our initial brand was almost more of a placeholder brand because we created it the moment we incorporated the company, which was again late 2020, beginning of 2021, where we needed something so that as we built, we could at least share it with people. We could put up a landing page and just feel like, okay, there's something here. But we didn't invest a whole lot into it. And so it was pretty limited in sort of what I call the DNA of the brand. There wasn't that many ... The art direction was very limited in scope. There wasn't much when it came to voice and tone.

(00:39:12):
And so it was something that we knew was good enough to start, but it wasn't scalable. And when I think about something that could be scalable, it's almost like you can take the ingredients of a brand and replicate it a ton, this DNA is something where you can imagine creating tons of content around and all feeling pretty cohesive. And I think that needs to be done by design. You're really being thoughtful about every single element. Like what is the art direction you want to go with? What is the voice and tone? Such that as you're creating thousands of pieces of copy, it all feels pretty cohesive.

(00:39:45):
And so we went back to the drawing board and we spent many months rethinking what would be the brand, what is this vision that we have longer term? Our creative director internally partner with Smith & Diction, an amazing agency that has helped folks like Perplexity also do their rebrand or their initial brand. And we [inaudible 00:40:05] many months just really trying to craft what we think is the core DNA of the brand, and doing so in a way that we could replicate it as much as possible.

(00:40:15):
Replication piece of it comes into play, because as you start scaling you're going to have to create a ton of content, your own content on social media, ads for performance marketing, assets for influencers to be able to use and showcase in their content. And so you're going from tiny pieces of content to all of a sudden every week we're testing thousands of pieces of creative. And you cannot do that if you don't feel confident that as you're replicating, you have that sort of cohesive feel. So for us that we realized it was going to be necessary and it's why we invested so much. It ended up being way more expensive, way more time consuming than I would've imagined. But I think coming on the other side of it being the right investment, feeling that that was the right time to do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:55):
I love how many things you did that feel like this will not work out. Building a startup within the presentation space, doing a whole rebrand in the middle of scaling, also just reworking the entire product after you launched and just rethinking the whole thing. All these things and everyone's always like, "No, this is not how we win." And interestingly, worked out for you guys.

(00:41:19):
I want to come back to the brand stuff, but one of the most interesting ways you guys grew early on was influencer marketing, which a lot of people hear about and talk about. I haven't heard much of how to actually do this and what actually works. Talk about that as a broad growth lever for you guys. And then I want to get into just what tools did you use, who actually was really helpful there, thing like that. So yeah, just give us the big picture.

Grant Lee (00:41:44):
Yeah. I think a lot of founders assume that with influencer marketing it's almost like turnkey. You set aside a budget, you find some creators, you figure out the right campaign or the right moment of time to do it and it's all done, you're ready to go. And I think the reality is, going back to this founder-led marketing mindset is like, well, you're going to set yourself up for success if you actually are super involved in that entire process. So for us, what this meant was all the initial influencers I onboarded manually myself. I would jump on a call with each one of them so that they understood what Gamma represented, how to use the product. You want to be able to have them tell your story but in their voice, right? And they can't do that if you're not willing to put in that investment.

(00:42:32):
And so we would spend a lot of time going through ... It wasn't my job to tell them how to pitch Gamma, but it was my job to make sure that they understood what Gamma was as a product. And so we'd spend a lot of time, like me just walking through the product, them asking questions, us just kind of brainstorming what could the hooks be, and me just giving them some initial feedback and saying, "Oh yeah, this one, I love that. I figure it's going to work great for your audience." But not trying to be super prescriptive. And working with a ton of micro influencers, people that don't have massive followings but are committed to ... Going back to giving value to your audience. They're committed to giving value to their audiences. They want to be able to showcase tools that actually they would use or they are using. And how do you do that in an authentic way? You can't really fake that. You really need to spend the time doing that.

(00:43:16):
And just like you would onboard a customer, you onboard an influencer the same way. You want them to be an extension of your team. And I think they can feel whether or not you're willing to put in the work. And if you're not, then they're just going to treat it like any other project, ship it and be done with it. If you invest in that relationship, guess what? They'll be back to actually post about you again. And you're all of a sudden having this sort of this relationship that actually you can build over time. I think that's really where the magic is. Too many people discount that initial piece.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:47):
This is awesome. To be clear, influencer marketing, essentially a person with a following on say TikTok, Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn, whatever, gets paid in some way to promote your product. That's the simple way to understand influencer marketing, yeah?

Grant Lee (00:44:00):
Yes, that's definitely the simple way. And I'd say there's definitely different levels. I think a lot of people think influencer marketing and they'll think these big trendy creators, people that have a million followers for instance. And the idea is that, okay, we're going to carve out a really big budget, we're going to choose five or six that we feel like are really the tastemakers in the space and put all of our money into just having them talk about our product. And I think usually this is kind of the wrong approach. Because many of them, they do have massive audiences. And for you, you basically give them a script to read and it immediately feels like an ad. That product is not connected really to them in any way. It's just something that they're ... For this week they happen to be working with you and then they move on with their life. And it never feels organic or authentic and you wasted a ton of money doing so.

(00:44:55):
I think you're much better doing the hard thing, which is hard to scale, but it's finding the thousands of micro influencers that have an audience where your product maybe is actually useful. And for instance, for us early on it'd be educators, people that for them, part of their job is creating slides every day because they need to engage their students. And so for them, having a tool that actually saved them a ton of time was something they love talking about. And if you can find some of these pockets, we call them echo chambers, where if you find a pocket like educators, teachers love telling other teachers about products they love using. During summer break, they all come together and talk about, "Okay, what are the things that are going to actually improve my job next school season?" And obviously during this AI wave, a lot of those have been, "Okay, what are the AI tools that just save me a ton of time?"

(00:45:43):
And so if you can start actually tapping into these pockets of echo chambers, that's even better. It doesn't have to be this flashy, well-known influencer. It's actually just this person that has an audience where people really trust what they say. And that's amazing. That ends up becoming this sort of wildfire that can spread really, really fast.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:03):
And what's the dollar amount these folks get? It's like a few hundred bucks, a few thousand bucks, something like that?

Grant Lee (00:46:07):
Yeah, few hundred to low thousands, low single digit thousands.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:11):
How do you find these folks? Is there tools that you use? Is it just like a bunch of manual searching and looking?

Grant Lee (00:46:17):
Yeah, in the very beginning it was all manual, a lot of cold outreach. And then we ended up finding a couple of different things. One is a platform, a YC company called 1stCollab. That has been amazing. They basically do all of the automated outbound for you. Plus you can help them actually create profiles or personas of different creators, so for instance educators being one, and then they'll go out and actually, based on that profile, find all the right creators for you. So they've been amazing, really great to work with.

(00:46:46):
And then we've also found small agencies to also help kind of augment that. I look for agencies that are super young and hungry. These are people that they're native to social media and so they really understand it. And they can really be able to bring in creators that are great to work with. And I think part of it is if you find creators that are great to work with, everything else becomes easy. So we've had a few, one is AKG Media, actually out in the UK, and they've been fantastic to work with as well. So you kind of find a few different things, either agencies or platforms that can help you actually scale this thing up.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:22):
And when they post, they're generally transparent about this is a paid promotion, right?

Grant Lee (00:47:23):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:27):
They're not just pretending, "I found this tool and I love it"? Cool.

Grant Lee (00:47:31):
Yeah, exactly right.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:32):
Okay. And so how much impact did this lever of influencer marketing have on your growth, say from 10 to 100? Is this the biggest lever of growth other than just word-of-mouth, people continue to share it?

Grant Lee (00:47:44):
Yeah, so word-of-mouth has definitely been the biggest. So we look at all new subscriber growth, over 50% of this is word-of-mouth. It's either people searching direct, coming direct, entering Gamma.op, or going through search and typing in Gamma, like a branded keyword search, where they're looking for Gamma, they've heard about Gamma. But I think for us, social media and influencers specifically has always been an amplifier. So every time we invest in influencer marketing, we actually see word-of-mouth increase even more. And it's always like you can just see it. Basically anytime you spend a little bit of money, you start seeing people come through influencer, the word-of-mouth factor actually will get another 1.5 additional users on top of that, which has been really interesting to see.

(00:48:29):
And I think part of this is just recognizing that ... And I think we kind of understand it, but with influencer marketing, why it's so effective, we all know Dunbar's number, which is have this number of 150 people that you call kind of your network. And your network you trust more than the average stranger down the street. If they tell you something, they recommend something, there is a sort of halo effect, you learn to trust them. A lot of these influencers, the reason why they share so much about their lives is because they want to be in your network. They want you to feel super close. And once you feel super close, you trust them to actually share things that are going to be useful.

(00:49:05):
And so when they recommend a tool, there is a sort of halo effect, where it doesn't feel like it's coming from a stranger, it feels like it's coming from a friend. And that's where every time we've spent money there you actually see this amplifications, like, "Okay, that's kind of interesting." You wouldn't necessarily expect that. But for us it's been this sort of amplifier from the very beginning.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:24):
This is so fun to hear about. I've not heard this level of detail on how influencer marketing works and how to make it work. A few more questions here. So you said there's maybe a few thousand people you ended up working with, roughly, influencers?

Grant Lee (00:49:35):
Over the course of a year. It wasn't all in the same time. Basically in the beginning you do ... In the very, very beginning we had a small budget. It was like 20 creators a month. And then you start increasing that to like 50, then 100. We're definitely not fully scaled at this point, but I could easily see a point where you're working with many, many creators every single month. And that gives you a chance to actually test a variety of, again, content hooks, ways to talk about the product, value props.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:03):
Amazing. And you said the key here is you spend time with every one of these creators, influencers early on to help make sure they understand what you're doing and get excited about it. It isn't just like a thing you outsource.

Grant Lee (00:50:16):
I think there's a lot of value there. It's again hard to quantify. And most founders probably feel like they're too busy to allocate that time. But I think it was a good investment. Because going back to you want them to feel like an extension of your team. They're not going to feel like an extension of your team if, one, they've never met you, and two, you've never even told them really how the product works. They're forced to go to your website to figure it all out. Those are going to be not a whole lot of love that they're feeling from the outset.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:47):
So what I'm hearing is quality over quantity, especially when you're getting started. And then there's this other piece of niche which I think is very counterintuitive. Instead of going to large influencers with a huge audience, it's good with folks that are small. What's like a audience size roughly that you think is ideal for this, or what niche just means?

Grant Lee (00:51:05):
Honestly, I don't think there's a minimum, because even with platforms like TikTok, they oftentimes are giving you credit for a brand new account. They want to help amplify that new account, because obviously if they're thinking from a creator perspective, if that new creator feels like, "Oh, coming to TikTok is a massive win for me," they're going to be more invested in it. And so there really isn't a minimum. A lot of these platforms are trying to shift to kind of the same thing, where they really reward new creators on the platform. And so you could have a small audience, it doesn't really matter. You could have 10,000 followers, that's also good. I think as long as the content feels, again, engaging, authentic to the people you're talking to I think it has a really good chance of actually taking off.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:46):
That's such a good point with TikTok, where it's not follower related, if it's useful and people find it clickable or whatever, likable, viewable, the algorithm will spread it to a lot of people. Such a good point.

Grant Lee (00:51:59):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:00):
Okay, there's a couple more points you made in the tweet that I want to make sure we highlight. So one is you made this point that 90% of your reach in influencer marketing comes from less than 10% of people. Is there anything there that you think is important for people to hear?

Grant Lee (00:52:11):
Yeah, I mean this just goes back to it's hard to know where that 10% is going to come from. So you kind of just have to cast a super wide net. You can sort of, I think try to, again, trick yourself into thinking you're great at picking creators or you're great at telling them how to post about your stuff. But the reality is, even for me, I could never guess. I kind of had some idea, but I just had to make sure that I was meeting enough creators broadly such that when you meet enough, they're all posting, there's some pocket that end up just taking off. And I was not a good predictor of that. I was not smart enough to actually know which ones would take off. I just knew that we had to play the sort of numbers game to make it work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:49):
So one of your tips here is people fail often in this because they start too small or their budget's a little too small. You recommend 10,000 to 20,000 a month over six months and just trying this. It sounds like you're doing like 20 to 30 creators a month. Is that the right framework for how to just start this thing and explore?

Grant Lee (00:53:07):
Yeah, totally. And I'd say it's not just that the budget's too small, it would be that they put all their eggs in one basket. So you can also easily blow that 20 K on just one bigger influencer and then be like, "Oh, that didn't work, so I'm going to try it again. That didn't work. Okay, I give up." And I think rather than doing that, you should be like, "Okay, that 20 K, I could actually probably work with 40 different influencers and see what actually works." And across the 40, I'm going to try to find a variety of personas, a variety of use cases, spend a lot of time with them, and then actually see what's working, what's not.

(00:53:39):
And then next month take those learnings and double down. If educators are working, go with educators. If consultants are working, go with consultants, find more consultants, there's going to be more there. I think that's where the putting all your eggs in one basket is just probably the surest way to fail, because you're going to miss a ton and it's going to take you way too long to learn and you're going to come to the conclusion that it's a waste of time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:00):
I feel like this whole podcast conversation could be just about this one lever. So much I want to keep talking about, but there's more questions here because this is so useful and interesting. You had this line in your tweet about how reality is not an accident and that this approach is how you figure out what actually works. And then once you do that, then you start leading into that messaging. Talk about that.

Grant Lee (00:54:20):
This goes back to obviously if you're testing a bunch, you'll finally find that sort of post or set of posts that actually go viral. Going back to just the fundamentals, like make it easy for your influencers to be able to tell your story in their voice. One thing we did, we open sourced basically our entire brand. We have Brand.gamma.app, which is everything about our brand, our voice and tone, our art direction, what we use in mid-journey to create the sort of art direction that we have so that a creator can do the same, right? And they can actually just copy all of that so that they don't have to reinvent the wheel every time they're trying to post about Gamma. They have all of that.

(00:54:56):
And I think going back to this notion of just make it dead simple for them, remove friction. They already have enough on their plate to have to figure out. Don't make it any harder than it is. And if you remove friction, then it's like, oh, you get into this rhythm of adding creators is easy, having them post is easy, reviewing what's working, what's not is easy. And if you're able to do that relentlessly over many, many months, then all of a sudden hitting the sort of viral post is easy because you're going to have enough bats there where some are actually going to pop off. But you only can get there after you've done all the hard work before that to remove friction from the process. And feeling like it's almost like a well-oiled machine at that point.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:38):
Is there a platform you find most helpful for the stuff you guys are doing? Is it like TikTok, Instagram, LinkedIn, something else?

Grant Lee (00:55:45):
Yeah, I mean this is one where for us we cast a pretty wide net too. But it's very clear, LinkedIn, the conversion rates are just substantially higher. They're 4X, maybe 5X higher than other platforms. And I think a lot of people are probably still sleeping on LinkedIn, frankly. And so it's one where some of the influencers there or creators there can be a little bit more costly. But if you can eventually be more targeted knowing that, hey, this type of creator is pretty impactful for our product, then working with them, it's just like, "Oh, that's great." The conversion rates are just so strong and it really feels like we're just getting started there.

(00:56:22):
So if in the beginning you're not sure, it's always helpful to cast a pretty wide net. And then similar to just the influencer strategy, like test and iterate, you'll figure out ... Many of these things will follow a power law. So it's like one or two channels are going to be the most important for you. For instance, Twitter for us hasn't been that impactful. And I think for tools like Notion, they've been really, really impactful. You're not going to really know, and so just test and then double down on the ones that really move the needle for your product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:48):
I think that many people listening now are like, "Wait, LinkedIn posts are sponsored sometimes? I didn't know that." How do you know if it's a sponsored post? Is it like a #sponsored or something like that? How do they communicate this?

Grant Lee (00:56:57):
Usually they'll say they're a partner or yeah, basically it is sponsored in some form, or they'll #ad or something along those lines. So that's probably the way you'll see it the most.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:12):
Cool. By the way, I don't do this sort of stuff. Have you ever seen me on LinkedIn? I'm not doing any paid stuff. It's just so people know. And I don't plan to do that.

(00:57:19):
This episode is brought to you by Miro. Every day, new headlines are scaring us about all the ways that AI is coming for our jobs, creating a lot of anxiety and fear. But a recent survey for Miro tells a different story. 76% of people believe that AI can benefit their role, but over 50% of people struggle to know when to use it. Enter Miro's Innovation Workspace, an intelligent platform that brings people and AI together in a shared space to get great work done. Miro has been empowering teams to transform bold ideas into the next big thing for over a decade. Today, they're at the forefront of bringing products to market even faster by unleashing the combined power of AI and human potential. Guests of this podcast often share Miro templates. I use it all the time to brainstorm ideas with my team-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:00):
... Often share Miro templates. I use it all the time to brainstorm ideas with my team. Teams especially can work with Miro AI to turn unstructured data, like sticky notes or screenshots, into usable diagrams, product briefs, data tables, and prototypes in minutes. You don't have to be an AI master or to toggle yet another tool. The work you're already doing in Miro's Canvas is the prompt. Help your teams get great work done with Miro. Check it out at miro.com/Lenny. That's M-I-R-O .com/Lenny. Let's come back to this brand point. So, one of your big lessons is invest in brand before you go heavy into hit paid ads and performance marketing. I imagine you do some ads at this point on Facebook and Google and things like that.

Grant Lee (00:58:42):
Yeah, we run ads performance marketing. I think there's this stigma that brand marketing and performance marketing are sort of at odds with each other. I very much follow the sort of thought that brand marketing is performance marketing. Everything is some form of performance marketing. It just might not be as attributable, so the ability to actually map back to every single dollar spent is a little bit harder, but it doesn't mean that it's not impactful.

(00:59:12):
And I think as a company scales, you have to invest in both, and ideally they work really, really well together. The more you invest in brand marketing, it strengthens your performance marketing. This goes back to having enough creative to even test. If you're too limited in scope and you don't have a brand, you feel like you can actually amplify your handicapping, your ability to actually have a good performance marketing program.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:32):
I love that heuristic of how do you know if you are under invested in brand is if you're limited in the number of ideas you can try in performance marketing.

Grant Lee (00:59:32):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:43):
Is your design system just... Is everyone having to redesign things from scratch and come up with all these frameworks every time they run an ad?

Grant Lee (00:59:52):
Exactly. Yeah, yeah. Basically you kind of have a feeling for, "If I were to scale this up to a thousand pieces of creative, would it still feel cohesive or is it kind of all over the place?" And if it feels like it's all over the place, then you kind of have to go back to the drawing board.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:05):
You said when you talked about the rebrand, that it took a lot longer than you expected, that it was more expensive than you expected. That's the fear, I think, everyone has when they hear this like, "Oh, I don't have time for a rebrand." I also imagine, because your product is so visual, that it makes more sense to invest there and to spend the time and money.

(01:00:23):
For the typical founder, do you have any just, I don't know, thoughts of just like, "Here's when it makes sense. Here's a sign you really need to invest here heavily." Versus, "It'll probably be all right."

Grant Lee (01:00:32):
Yeah. I mean, I do think it's probably more geared toward anything that's a little bit more prosumer or consumer because so much of your product, you're trying to create this feeling for a user, what are they experiencing. And the experience happens way before they even drop into your product. It might be they see an ad or they see a billboard or they see something. It's like, "Okay, that piqued my interest a little bit."

(01:00:56):
And then you need some sort of symmetric messaging in that they see there's some symmetry in that, they see the ad, then they drop into the product or they land on your website, it feels cohesive and it feels like, "Okay, this is interesting. I'm going to go all the way through to sign up and then maybe actually start using the product."

(01:01:12):
That's a little bit different when it's a B2B product or where there isn't as much reliance on that initial moment. They might just hear about it through a colleague and then sign up for it and then go through a huge procurement process and then it's like, "Okay, maybe it matters, but probably not so much as for a product where the brand can have so many different touch points."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:33):
I want to talk about some broader things that have worked to help you grow, but before we do that, I just want to visualize the pie chart of how Gamma grows. Say, post-10 million ARR. If I have it correctly in my head, it's over 50% just word of mouth, organic, people are sharing it, doing presentations for each other, "Oh, it's Gamma. Just go check it out, sign up." Then it feels like the second-biggest bucket is influencer marketing, social stuff. And then is the third performance/paid marketing?

Grant Lee (01:02:03):
Yep, that's right. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:04):
Cool. On that last piece, is there anything else there for people that are starting to explore performance marketing, essentially Facebook Ads, Google Ads, all these other platforms, is there anything else that you think might be helpful for people to hear or learn just to get started down this road?

Grant Lee (01:02:19):
I would just have two recommendations. One, going back to my initial piece of advice, which is don't invest until you have word of mouth. Don't fool yourself into thinking that you'll solve other problems by just starting to ramp up a performance marketing program. Just get the word of mouthpiece first, so that you're coming into this program with some tailwinds and then start ramping it up.

(01:02:40):
The second piece is: set some constraints. You don't want your product to be at a point where more than 50% of your acquisitions are coming through paid acquisition. I think if that is happening, your core growth engine is broken. And it feeds right back to point number one, which is if your core growth engine is broken, you just have this leaky bucket. You're trying to spend so much money building top of the funnel, people are not making it all the way through. Something else should be fixed before you really try to dial it up. And it doesn't mean you don't spend a little bit of money, but just don't dial it up until you feel like your core growth engine is actually working.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:17):
When you said the first point about wait until you have word of mouth before investing in performance marketing, is that essentially a large chunk of your growth should be coming from word of mouth, direct, organic?

Grant Lee (01:03:29):
Yeah, yeah. And for us, even at scale, again going back to more than 50% of new signups still come through word of mouth. That, for us, is a sign like, "Okay, if something is still working, people are using the product, telling other people, then you want that feeling before you really start dialing anything else up."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:45):
Is there a percentage that you think is helpful for people to think about just... Is it 25% or more something like that or just word of mouth for you to feel like, "Okay, we actually have organic growth as a major growth engine"?

Grant Lee (01:03:55):
Yeah, I think this comes back to maybe just how maybe aggressive you want to be. I think just rough heuristic is the more, the better. If it's over 50%, I think that's great. If it's approaching that, good. And just going back to, don't fool yourself into thinking just ads is going to be the way you grow. Because you can do that, but everything else becomes harder and harder. 

(01:04:16):
If you rely on paid acquisition to be the main growth engine, you should be prepared for things like CAC, like customer acquisition costs, to keep going up. The more you're trying to reach a new audience, it gets more and more expensive. So, don't assume it's going to be flat, and then all of a sudden you're running on this treadmill that's actually running faster and faster. And so that's where it's easy to get hooked on that early on when you're just investing a small amount of money, and then it's almost impossible to get off that treadmill when you're too far into it. So, anticipate that and give yourself a better chance at actually being able to sustain that growth long-term.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:50):
Important advice. Okay. There's a couple more elements you've shared that were key to Gamma's growth. One is sharing prototypes with users before you ship. What does that look like? What does that mean? Why is that so powerful?

Grant Lee (01:05:05):
Yeah. I mean, this for us was a huge unlock. Going back to early days, when you're just trying to get your product into anybody's hands, you're getting to your friends trying to use it, and again, they're going to lie to you, tell you how great it is, and then never come back to using the product. 

(01:05:19):
I think what you want to be able to do, the ideal situation is, you recruit a bunch of people that are legitimately good prospective users or customers of your product, but have zero skin in the game. They do not care at all whether or not your product succeeds. They're just in it to test it. And for us, it was people that have made slide decks or make slide decks regularly, let's drop them into Gamma, give them very little context. We just tell you, "Hey, this is an alternative to PowerPoint. Go ahead and try it."

(01:05:48):
And then as you're going through the onboarding flow and testing the product, just tell us everything that's going on in your head, describe what you're seeing, tell us what you're trying to do. We'll give you maybe a few different tasks like, "Oh, create a piece of content." And when you watch them do that and also hear what they're saying, you just immediately feel the pain. 

(01:06:10):
All the places they're struggling and all the places are so confused by what they're seeing and you sort of then can internalize that pain and say, "Okay, we're going back and we have to fix this. This is not usable." We, oftentimes, are dog-fooding everything. And so you can get to the point where you're so familiar with your own product, everything feels kind of easy and you know where things are, but when you start actually hearing other people describe their usage of the product, that's a gift.

(01:06:36):
You're all of a sudden you're like, "Okay, now I know where to actually spend the time." People aren't even getting to the third screen. They're stuck on the first screen because they can't even find the button that we think is so dead obvious, and so let's go back and actually re-engineer, re-architect that piece of it.

(01:06:50):
And we've done that for everything: landing pages, onboarding experience, new feature launches, export, sharing, every single piece of that such that we can actually see where things are working or not. And then every time, we'll learn something that's kind of painful, but obvious that we need to fix and we go back and fix it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:08):
How do you scale this sort of thing? How do you run every new big idea, new feature change by people? Do you have a closed beta group, a decent platform? How do you actually do this?

Grant Lee (01:07:19):
There's a couple of great platforms. Voicepanel, which is also YC company, full disclosure, angel investor, and then there's also platforms like UserTesting, that really help you source and find these people that fit again, that persona or profile you're looking for. So, in our case, people that are in a specific job function or create decks regularly, and so you can use those platforms to really scale up these programs pretty fast.

(01:07:45):
And then once your team knows how to use those platforms... We would have an idea in the morning and in the afternoon, we're already running a pretty full scale experiment or a research study, and by the evening or by the next day, we can actually go through all of it together. So, it's pretty fast once you have it set up. It's more about how do you get the program onboarded the right way. 

(01:08:06):
I think the other sort of mechanism we did early on was once we had some repeat users, we created sort of a program for our power users. We called it the Gammaster Program, which is we put them into a separate Slack workspace, and that was a place for us to share very, very early prototypes like wireframes, sometimes they were functional prototypes, and get them to get some initial feedback as well. This definitely helps with more later stage or features or things that aren't going to be necessarily important as part of onboarding, but once you understand Gamma, like, "Oh, how do you share it?" 

(01:08:41):
For instance, this was a great way to start testing some of that because they already understand Gamma, but now you're adding that new functionality. And then we can also watch them struggle and hear how they're struggling with the product. And so that has been a great way just to have a separate Slack workspace. Anytime we're thinking about something, they're the first to hear about it. Give us some early indication if we're on the right track or not.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:00):
I love this workflow that you shared of you have an idea in the morning, you built a prototype. Do you built it with AI prototyping tools like Cursor, Lovable, something like that?

Grant Lee (01:09:11):
Yep. That or it could be... Yeah, I mean we're lucky a lot of our designers also know how to code, so even before the recent tools, come up with some sort of functional prototype and then be able to ship that so people can start playing with it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:24):
Yeah. So, you have an idea in the morning, you build a prototype using various tools. By the end of the day, you are getting feedback from real people using one of these platforms, Voicepanel or UserTesting, and just that loop saves you, I imagine, potentially months of just building the thing nobody wants and shipping it, launching it, and then just failing. 

Grant Lee (01:09:45):
Totally. Yeah. I think this is even more probably helpful for certainly a lot of folks that are starting to do much with vibe-coded apps. Yeah, that's great. You've lowered the amount of time to get something out there. Now, prove that it's useful to some set of users, and this should be again, every day, every week, you should be able to go through a ton of these, and then build on the things that seem to be working. 

(01:10:08):
I feel like that's almost like a way to speed run a lot of that early... you're in the idea maze, you think you have something that could kind of work. How do you actually break through so that people are actually finding value in what you're building?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:21):
Yeah, I love it because so many people hear this idea of just run your stuff by users before you do the user research. It sounds so hard and heavy lift-y, and the way you're describing it is very automated, very quick to do. You don't have to go think about finding random people in a coffee shop. It's just like these platforms exist where you could go plug in your thing, get feedback by the end of the day.

Grant Lee (01:10:44):
Totally. Yeah, and that helps you just move way faster.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:48):
Is there a feature that you were super excited about that you built and ran through this and just like, "Okay, that was a huge failure"?

Grant Lee (01:10:54):
I don't think any of the ones where we... We always try to chunk it down. So, none of the things we're testing earlier on are these massive features. They're always an inception or a starting point of, "This could be something interesting."

(01:11:07):
And then we take that initial learning and actually then build the product around it. It's never like, "Oh, we spent four months working on this thing. Let's see if anybody actually wants it." It's almost like we always start super early. And then a bunch of ideas die right away, but they're still pretty small ideas. 

(01:11:20):
And then the ones that kind of pass the initial test, you start building towards something that could be, hopefully, more game-changing or much more value-add. And by the time you're actually shipping, you've gone through 10 different layers of actually testing and iteration before it actually sees the light of day.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:34):
What's really interesting about you and the way your company operates, you guys are ex-Optimizely people, so you're very versed in experimentation. A lot of people talk about A/B testing experimentation as something that doesn't make sense for a startup because the scale is so low. What I'm hearing here, and I know this is something you talk about, is just there is actually a lot of ways to think experimentally, even in the early stages. Is there something more there you think is important for people to hear?

Grant Lee (01:12:01):
Yeah. I really think it's more of... The mindset you go into to almost any problem or opportunity is the saying of, "Strong opinions weakly held." I think it's totally fine to have some of these assumptions or hypotheses going into a lot of these things, but you should always know that there's a way to start trying to validate some of this.

(01:12:20):
As a founder, you're always trying to build conviction, and so you build conviction by not having it all live in your head, but getting it out there and start testing this with users, prospect customers, and starting to see what are the things that actually feel right. And sometimes you have enough data to be statistically significant. Sometimes it's more of a, "Hey, we at least were able to gut check this a little bit and get some qualitative feedback." I think that's still valuable. It shouldn't be this sort of all or nothing like, "It has to be static for it to be useful." I don't think that's true. 

(01:12:49):
In fact, I'll just share the very early story of when we first started Gamma, we knew we wanted to help change the way people communicate, and we actually had two different ideas we were parallel pathing kind of at the same time. Of course we had presentations, reimagining how people were creating presentations, and we also actually had this separate idea, which we called The Lobby, which is a virtual office. This is a place where this is, again, peak pandemic, much more hybrid work, much more virtual work. And so this was a place where everybody on the team, whether you're in the same office or not, could gather, collaborate to feel pretty magical. 

(01:13:26):
And we worked on both for six months. We worked on both the virtual office and the presentation product for six months. We would dog-food both. So, oftentimes we'd be in the virtual office, presenting the presentation tool and kind of use both. And after six months, we came to this conclusion that we wanted to go all in on the presentation tool. And the reason was, when we looked at the virtual office tool, we were sort of always competing against what we thought was something we'd never be able to surpass, which is in real life experience, actually being able to work shoulder to shoulder with your colleagues and having this environment where you really feel like you're building together. 

(01:14:05):
Virtual office could get pretty good, but we would never beat that. And so we were almost limited in our own imagination about how good could this product be versus the presentation product. We ended up with a million more ideas we thought we could actually introduce that could be better than how you work in PowerPoint today. We were just so energized by it. 

(01:14:25):
And so for us, that was this sort of A/B test of testing these two things that we invested equal amount of time into, and coming out at the other end realizing that, one, was going to be the product we were pour all of our blood, sweat and tears into making it great because we saw the potential in it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:43):
I didn't know that about you guys, that you explored that other idea. There's so many startups that did that during COVID times, and like, "Okay, this is the future. We're all going to be remote, and let's work remotely in virtual offices." There's a startup and I'm a tiny investor in, Lindy, that is now a big AI agent company, and they did the same thing. I imagine that was their whole first concept. It was just these little avatars. It was like a little game where you walk around, go to little virtual meeting rooms. 

Grant Lee (01:15:07):
Yeah, it was a fun product to work on, but yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:12):
Yeah, it's interesting how we just reverted back to the mean of just like, "Yeah, people are in offices again. That was a fun experience." Although things have changed. Just to highlight this point you made that I think is really powerful, I haven't heard it described this way before, just the power of testing prototypes very, very, very early, using these platforms that make it super easy.

(01:15:34):
We always hear, "Okay, you have a mock, you have a prototype. Yeah, testing with users always feels like this heavy thing. You got to have a user research team, go do interviews, do one-on-ones." What you're describing is something... I don't know why everyone's not doing this. With AI tools, it's so easy now. Have an idea, build the prototype, test it with, I don't know, is it like dozens of people? How many people actually run through a prototype on average?

Grant Lee (01:15:58):
20.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:59):
20 people. So, 20 people look at this thing, give you a bunch of feedback, you realize this was very dumb, or, "Here's the nugget that we want to lean into." And instead of building a thing, instead of doing all these user research sessions, things like that. Super cool. 

(01:16:12):
Okay. Is there any other big lesson or lever that has helped you grow to today's 100 million ARR, and $2 billion company? We talked about influencer marketing, we talked about testing prototypes, investing in brand and a little bit of paid growth. Anything else?

Grant Lee (01:16:33):
Certainly for us, the ability to adapt and move fast in this environment. I attribute a lot of what we've been able to accomplish to a few things. One is we do have a small team and a lean team, one that's able to move really fast. I think that means, by default, we have to look for a lot of levers where a small team can do a lot of different things. 

(01:16:54):
So, we can talk, one, obviously about how do you construct a team like ours and what I think has worked. And then two, going back to experimentation being this sort of thing where for us it's been a huge unlock because it allows you to not only test things and iterate a ton, it allows you to build much more efficiently. And so we've been in a startup where we've had great unit economics from the very beginning. We run profitably, we have really strong margins. 

(01:17:22):
I don't think that would be possible if experimentation wasn't core infrastructure to us because the temptation would be you just throw the most expensive model at every job and assume that's going to work. And the reality is that never is the case. And so for us to be able to actually test across 20 different models in production today, always trying to align the kind of value we're delivering to our customers with our ability to actually scale this operation, that's been in the background. 

(01:17:48):
And not always things that are easily quantifiable or things that you're sharing broadly, but it is core to our DNA. And again, going back to a team that came from Optimizely, probably not surprising, but I do think that's been part of our ability to actually execute at this level.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:03):
I love that the product is so beautiful and such a good experience. It's such a good example of experimentation and being really obsessed with running experiments, A/B tests. Data can create really beautiful products and experiences that aren't just feeling like some kind of micro-optimized flow.

Grant Lee (01:18:19):
Totally. Yeah. And just going back to one part of the team, part of that plays a huge role, which is you want to build a product where people talk about taste and brand and all these things, what they emote. I'm not going to throw in whether or not, yes or no, but I do think it makes a difference. And for us, at some point, more than a quarter of a team or about a quarter of our team was product designers. I think that's an unintuitive level of investment, or at least that's not common. You don't see many startups at our stage or early stage where a quarter of the team's product designers. 

(01:18:55):
And I think that was an important investment for us because when you think about with AI companies, so many companies are trying to invent new surface areas or new user experiences, and that's not possible if you're not really getting the foundation right, really thinking deeply about user problems and how can you solve them in a novel way. And so for us, we made that investment in the very beginning, even if it was counter to what other startups would do, because we actually felt like it was the right thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:21):
Okay. I definitely want to spend more time on hiring. Before we get to that, you've touched on this kind of concept that you guys are, what many described, a GPT wrapper company. You essentially sit on top of other models, do some cool stuff, charge for that. There's historically, and there's been a big shift here, historically, there's this sense that, "Okay, you're just this thin layer on top of the model. How is there any sort of motor leverage or long-term business model here when it's just the model that is doing the thing and charging you guys to do all this AI work?"

(01:19:57):
It feels like people have started to realize maybe that is the only place money will be made because the models are just so hard to compete with, and that's not a place you can build a business anymore. Talk about just what you've learned about this concept of being a GPT wrapper, and what people may not be understanding about the business opportunity there.

Grant Lee (01:20:15):
When you think about maybe just literally only being a wrapper on one model or one provider, yeah, maybe there's only limited amount of utility or value add. But then when you start thinking about, "Okay, I'm going to go really deep into this one workflow, and it's not just one model." It's maybe 20 plus models powering all different parts of the product, and then you're thinking about the orchestration that's required and you're thinking about, obviously if you're experimenting constantly being able to test across the newest models versus models that have been around that are cheaper, you're doing a lot to really... Your job is to, again, align value, maximize the value you're delivering to the end user in a way that's sustainable for you as a business. And so there's a lot more to that. 

(01:21:00):
And so for us, we've always been passionate about being very close to our customers, our users. Who, for them, their job to be done is visual communication, visual storytelling. And the default tool today is going into a PowerPoint or Google Slides where the amount of effort to create something... We've all been there late at night trying to format a deck, trying to find the right layout, all this manual and tedious work. 

(01:21:24):
Well, what if you could abstract all that away and give them something that feels a little bit more delightful, a little bit easier, much more effortless? What would that earn you in terms of a customer that wants to come back to your product? And so that's everything that we focus on is you need to go deep into the workflow, be empathetic to the user and their job that you're trying to solve, and of course, apply the best technology possible so that you're delivering on that promise of a product experience that's way better than the status quo. 

(01:21:52):
And I think if you can be laser-focused on, it doesn't matter if you're a wrapper or not, what is the technology you're doing and applying, that makes a real difference? So, that's the ultimate goal.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:01):
This is a really cool framework for how to think about what it takes to build a successful wrapper company that is... I don't know, I'll keep using that term. I don't know if it's [inaudible 01:22:09], but just some ideas don't work. These model companies are launching their own products here and there.

(01:22:16):
So, what I love about what you're describing here is almost like a heuristic that'll tell you if there's an opportunity/how to be successful as a GPT "wrapper company." I'm putting in air quotes. It sounded like maybe there's three here. But talk about just if you think about the bullet points of what you need to do to build a successful business on top of existing models.

Grant Lee (01:22:37):
I mean, I think the most important thing is before we even talk about the technology, so we're skipping to the part where you're trying to apply the most interesting models or technology to solve some problem. Start with solving the problem you actually care about. 

(01:22:53):
I think it's very tempting right now to chase shiny objects, like a founder might be able to gain some initial traction by literally being that GPT wrapper and solving any sort of problem. And you start to see some traction and then you just go with that. But before you do that, you should think about, "Is this a problem I can invest five to 10 years into actually solving? Do I care deeply enough about it?"

(01:23:13):
Because if you can't, you're never going to go... actually think about overcoming the variety of different hurdles, whether it's other startups or other incumbent tools that are trying to start doing the same thing. 

(01:23:24):
And so for us, we go back to... We've started this company because we really care about helping change the way people communicate their ideas. We really feel like this idea of visual communication, visual storytelling matters. It helps elevate everybody and it gives people much more opportunity to do the things that in the past if you weren't great at making slides, your ideas might've died, and someone else that was able to actually articulate their ideas better ended up winning the deal or winning the favor of their manager or their boss. 

(01:23:53):
And so we felt like that was the wrong, that didn't feel right, and so could we help democratize visual storytelling, visual communication? That was sort of our north star. And then you go back into thinking, "Okay, every step of the way, what are the tools and technology I can apply to help solve that and actually move the average person closer to that long-term vision of ours?"

(01:24:14):
And of course, AI has been, again, this gift where yes, you can apply that to solving this job. You can also apply that AI to many different jobs. Figure out what is the problem you care deeply enough to go deep, because going back to this sort of idea, you need to own the sort of end-to-end workflow. A customer needs to have... You want your product to live in their brain somewhere where when they think about, "Hey, I have to create a presentation." They come to you as the default tool.

(01:24:40):
And the moment they start creating it to the moment they ship it and send it to their boss, that end-to-end experience needs to feel magical, needs to feel great. And I don't think you can really do that unless it's actually a workflow you either know deeply yourself or you care deeply to actually help solve for somebody else.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:57):
So, some of the elements I'm hearing here is, one, is just like actually really care about solving this problem, not come from, "Oh wow, this cool thing happened and it worked. Wow, maybe I could sell this thing to people." Because you may end up having to work on this thing for 10, 20 years.

Grant Lee (01:25:11):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:12):
Two is: understand the problem really, really deeply and have real empathy for the people trying to solve this problem. You have this problem creating presentations at your previous job, so you understood it, and I imagine you understand even more deeply now that you worked on this. Essentially, care really deeply, go really deep on the problem, have real empathy for the people facing this problem, and then there's this actually be able to solve this problem using the technology out there.

(01:25:39):
And you made this point about how you guys use 20 different models to do what you do. Talk a little bit more about that just because people may think, "Oh, okay, I could just go to ChatGPT or Claude and it'll create an awesome presentation for me." Why does it take 20 different models? Why is that such a big part of the success here?

Grant Lee (01:25:55):
Yeah, so going back to the workflow, you're trying to go and break down every step of the creation process for a user. So, the moment of the initial idea to maybe creating an outline of what you want to present or articulate to creating the first draft. What do we show you there to editing the content? 

(01:26:14):
Like, "Okay, I have a first draft, but it's only 60% of the way there. How do I get to 100% of the way there?" Those are all things that might require different models. The initial outline might be better served by something that's purposed-built for actually creating the best outline, the best narrative, the best story arc, versus one where you're actually going back and saying... Gamma, our agent can actually go and review your entire deck and say, "Actually, if I were to add suggestions, I would say, 'You may want to change the visual layout on these set of cards, and you may want to actually change the imagery or the visuals for these cards to match everything else.'"

(01:26:50):
These are things that, again, every model might be better served for different things. And so knowing how that actually breaks down into the end user, sitting down, working on the product, working on their presentation, how do you help them? I think you can only do that by understanding-

Grant Lee (01:27:00):
Their presentation, how do you help them? I think you can only do that by understanding that workflow and then breaking that down into finding the right tool for the right job.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:08):
That is super interesting. Essentially there's like, here's the things that AI has to do for us. I don't know, imagining some kind of a storyboard and then it's figure out the model and level of model and prompt for that model to achieve each of these steps as best as possible.

Grant Lee (01:27:23):
Totally. Yeah, and it applies to even on the visual side, finding the right image. I think certain models are great at photorealistic output versus others want more of the artistic vibe or something that feels more abstract. And so again, you can choose the right model for the right job. It doesn't mean that you'll never use other models, it's just like as you're going through that workflow, the content might dictate what's the best use case. So in that particular use case and so you're always trying to map to that, what is the end user trying to accomplish in that certain moment?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:55):
Which models are you finding most useful in the work? I don't know, is there anything surprising about, "Oh wow, this model's actually really good at this and this is really bad at that."

Grant Lee (01:28:04):
Yeah, I think surprising or not surprising, the leaderboard is constantly changing and so this is where you almost, you have to have the mindset that you can be adaptable. We're just getting to the point where there's going to be more personalization too, is going back to a consultant's going to have different needs than an educator. Educator's trying to engage their students. They may want to have language or visuals are more animated and that makes sense. Consultant can't get away with that. They may need something that is much more structured or information dense. And so again, how do we actually be the same tool that can serve both of those needs? I think that's where it becomes interesting and it's almost like there isn't necessarily even a "best model". It's like what's the right model for that particular user? That's actually a much harder problem to solve and we're just starting to try to embrace some of that now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:28:50):
Is there one that's just like, "Oh, that's actually really cool." For something that we didn't expect?

Grant Lee (01:28:54):
Early on, things like creating the outline, Perplexity was actually great. Not one that people talk about as often, but creating the outline and doing web search and actually integrating some of those elements together for us was pretty powerful.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:07):
Okay, there's two more things I want to talk about. One is pricing. How you guys figured out your approach to pricing. You guys started monetizing really early and that feels like such an important piece to AI startups because you're spending real money on an inference and other things. And then I want to talk about hiring. So in terms of pricing, when did you decide it was time to really start charging and then how did you pick your approach to pricing your actual price?

Grant Lee (01:29:32):
So we kind of stumbled into having to do pricing and packaging. I mentioned our big AI launch in March 2023. This was pre-revenue, so we wanted just to get, we focused all of our effort on the first 30 seconds, literally all hands on deck, just trying to get that right. And we spent zero time on actually monetization. So we had a credit system. All new users get 400 credits. Once they burn through those credits, there was actually nothing more you could do with AI. It kind of just got cut off. And so Intercom for us was just blowing up with people saying, "How do I purchase more credits? I want to keep using this thing." In a very fair question. So basically all of April we ended up having to do a quick sort of pricing and packaging exercise. We did a couple of different things.

(01:30:18):
We did run a form of Van Westendorp, which is just understanding-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:22):
Classic.

Grant Lee (01:30:23):
...what is the overall willingness to pay. And so we did use that. We did kind of integrate some forms of conjoint analysis, which is just trying to understand what are the features or things that people actually value in your product. And so we'd survey a lot of our early users and ended up coming to a price point that was, in the beginning we only had one plan type. It was roughly like 20 bucks a month. Part of this was also just realizing we almost didn't need to overthink it too much because this is when the initial wave of AI companies and startups were coming out and products are coming out and you almost end up becoming anchored by, what does ChatGPT charge? Because everyone becomes familiar with that price point. And so we ask ourselves how complicated do we want to make it?

(01:31:05):
We always default to remove friction, make it as easy as possible for a user to understand. And so we end up coming up with a similar price point and ship that as the V1, basically end of May 2023. And for us, we wanted to see a couple of things like, okay, we have the initial price point. Is it economical for us at that price point? Are we actually making money? And we'd monitor there for that for many, many months realizing that yes, actually at that price point we could still generate pretty good margins and that would allow us to reinvest that profit back into growing the business.

(01:31:37):
Continue to add obviously head count, but then also investing even more into inference costs, whatever we wanted to do to experiment broadly with AI. And so we've always had that pricing and packaging. Does it not only need to be easy to understand for a user, obviously you have to have strong conversion rates, but it should be something where you feel like you could build an enduring durable business off of. And if it's not right, then you can always go back and try to tweak things, but it's something you should be monitoring as early as possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:06):
What's interesting, we have the head of ChatGPT on the podcast and he shared the way they picked ChatGPT's prices is the Van Westendorp survey that they ran in Google Forms.

Grant Lee (01:32:14):
Totally. Yeah, I listened to that one. Yeah, it was a great one.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:17):
Oh, what a, that survey man, what a, and not only just that survey being the slick, I'm imagining that XKCD comic with the open source little, I don't know, block holding up the entire world, like this one little piece of code. That's like the survey, just behind everything. But it's interesting how that one decision just created this ripple effect on all AI startups, 20 bucks a month. Of course that's what everyone's doing.

Grant Lee (01:32:43):
Totally. Who knows what would happen if they chose a different number, but here we are.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:46):
Everyone would be so much more rich if it's just like 25 bucks. Someone. Imagine the GDP of growth-

Grant Lee (01:32:52):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:54):
...from that. Oh man. Okay. And then the way, so was Van Westendorp helped you pick a price point and then you said this conjoint analysis, we actually have a guest post that I think describes how to do this well and if not we'll find, appoint people to how to actually approach this. You started charging, so was post product [inaudible 01:33:11] launch, you launch with no paid features. People were just like, "I want to pay, I want to keep using this." You're like, "Okay, I guess we've got to start charging."

Grant Lee (01:33:18):
That's right. Yep.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:20):
Is there anything, looking back, I guess just you wish you'd known when you were approaching pricing for folks that are doing this now like, "Oh, we should have done this differently or should have thought about this."

Grant Lee (01:33:28):
Yeah, I mean that one's hard. I think you never want to obviously just throw something together without giving it much thought, but for us with limited resources, we focused on the only thing we thought mattered, which was getting some initial users and having that organic growth. And I think there's maybe two checkpoints of thinking about whether or not you feel like you have product market fit. I think one checkpoint is organic growth. The second is are people willing to pay for the product? And I think if you pass both those, you feel like you've, at least within some pocket of the market you have some PMF. So I think those are both important questions to ask depending on your resources. Ideally you can do kind of both and experiment a little bit along at the same time. And then by the time you actually have paying users, you sort of check some of those boxes for yourself.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:15):
By the way, I love that your launch pricing. You're like, "Okay, let's figure out if we're actually making money or not." It's not obvious with AI companies. [inaudible 01:34:24]

Grant Lee (01:34:24):
Well, we also didn't have a choice because at that point runway was also low. So if we weren't making money, well we would actually be in a tough spot.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:31):
That's such a good point that you did not have a huge amount of money sitting around to spend on the way a lot of companies in AI do, just, "We'll deal with it and we'll figure out how to make money later."

Grant Lee (01:34:40):
Totally. Within a couple of months we had hit a million in ARR and became profitable. And so those were both two exciting milestones for a company that months prior were heads down figuring out how we even survive.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:53):
What a story. I'm so excited to be telling this story. Okay, final topic I want to talk about is hiring. You have some really hot takes on hiring, clearly it's worked out for you guys. What are some things you've learned about hiring well, what is your approach to hiring?

Grant Lee (01:35:08):
So we had this mantra internally, I mean even before the sort of AI launch for us, which was "Hire painfully slowly." And I think the temptation is once things start working, you just start, [inaudible 01:35:23] scaling this thing and start adding more and more headcount. And for us that always, I don't know, that didn't feel right. We wanted to build the team very thoughtfully, be lean, but also be a team that every individual feels like they have high amount of impact that they have on a daily basis. And so for us that was from sort of the very beginning. And so even as we've scaled up, I think we've been super efficient by nature of just being a very lean team.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:47):
So I think a lot of people hear this advice of "Stay lean, be efficient." You have some even more concrete pieces of advice here of just what that looks like. You have a huge, I don't know, philosophy of just huge leverage per person. You focus a lot on revenue per employee. Talk about that.

Grant Lee (01:36:03):
So obviously we look at things like revenue per employee, but we never let that be the sort of North Star. It's not something that dictates our strategy per se. Same thing with profitability. I think by being efficient, that ends up becoming a side effect of yeah, we are profitable and growing. But I think for us more is like we care a ton about adding the right team members. So it's easy. You can almost sort of shoot yourself in the foot as a founder by just setting the wrong goals. If your goal is to double in headcount and add a hundred people to the company, then that becomes the goal. The goal is no longer to add the best people. It's no longer to maintain a high quality bar. The goal is to hit a hundred people and that's everything everyone's focused on. So then guess what?

(01:36:44):
If that's the goal, then the thing that ends up dropping is, okay, maybe we will settle for employees that are good enough and we're going to make sure we get to that hundred because a hundred is going to help us get to the next phase of growth. And then the next phase of growth. And I think we've tried to resist that temptation, which is we want everybody that comes through the door and joins our team to really be the type of person that represents Gamma. Our first 10 to 12 employees, we spent so much time really getting the DNA right. I think Brian Chesky talks about this. Your goal is you get that first 10 and you want to be able to then replicate the next 10 and then replicate the next 10, but that 10 needs to be all super cohesive. You need to have the same shared values, same principles, same ambition, same vision, and if you don't, then what are you even replicating?

(01:37:32):
Right? At that point you're just adding headcount and you can easily just be adding headcount because we're chasing the next shiny startup to join. And so for us, we really focused on that first 10. That allows us to really have this sort of community of teammates that basically want to stick around. A lot of founders think about not wanting to have a leaky bucket on the product side, but the same thing applies on the team side. If you have a leaky bucket, people are just constantly leaving, revolving door. That's a huge amount of cost. The continuity cost is massive and it's really hard to quantify.

(01:38:08):
And I mentioned our first 10 employees, all 10 of them are still here today, five years later. And so that sort of continuity, it means that you have this tribal knowledge that sticks with you. It means that people can continue building and having that sort of cohesive feeling. So I think that's one piece that's just like, it's hard to quantify, but I do think, new startups I would advise just to really be thoughtful about that, get that to a point where you really feel confident that as you're adding the next 10 and next hundred, you're actually replicating the same DNA and not actually just adding a bunch of random people to the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:39):
One of your very specific piece of advice is hire generalists versus someone that's just really deep in one thing, why is that so important? What does that look like?

Grant Lee (01:38:47):
This very much feels like the age of the generalist or the rise of the generalist right now. When we think about of a team that can be really flat, you still want people that can be very spiky in certain areas. So for instance, obviously a product designer that knows how to code, that's great. It allows you to actually span across many different domains. And again, an organization that's super flat, when you're wearing a lot of different hats, that means every individual, if you're a generalist, you can wear by default a lot of different hats. And that's helped us just maintain this idea that the work, the opportunity in front of us can easily expand. Each person plays a huge role. They don't need to wait and ask for permission. They can go after and pick up a piece of work because it's there and they can at least get it started even if they're not the one that always sees it through.

(01:39:34):
And so for us, I do think this rise of the generalist is going to be important. You can always augment that by working with contractors or agencies that are hyper-specialized in certain areas. And this is where, for instance, going back to influencer marketing, you might work with an agency rather than kind of scale up your own influencer marketing team. You work with a hyper-specialized team there. But my marketing team is all generalists. Our head of marketing more recently launched this cool drone show in San Francisco. We have 4,000 people in San Francisco. The mayor came by, she created that entire project and managed that entire project end to end herself while also managing the entire marketing team. And so it's like this idea that a generalist is able to play all these different roles, can still be super high impact. For us, it also goes hand in hand with, I mentioned sort of this other role, which is the player coach. Traditional management layer is like a manager manages a ton of people and that's kind of their core focus.

(01:40:33):
All of our people leaders are player coaches in that they still do the end work themselves and they can mentor and coach those around them. This analogy came from, or this mindset came from, it's something I borrowed from just the sports world in general because there's a lot of sports that just move incredibly fast. Like football for instance, it moves really, really fast. And so you might have a coach that's calling into play, but the quarterback can actually make a last-minute adjustment based on what he's seeing the defense do. And so you want a player that is on the field that can adapt as needed and that way the coach doesn't have to call every single thing in. He's just kind of giving you the general intent of what you want to run as the play and then the quarterback can still make the adjustments.

(01:41:13):
And so all of our people leaders, our management layer is all folks that actually can make those adjustments. If they're seeing something that doesn't feel right on a daily or weekly basis, they're adjusting priorities for that team and they're still doing the work themselves too. They're so close to it that they understand what is the relative prioritization at all times. So both of those I think have been, when I think about founders, they oftentimes think about innovation in the sense, we're going to innovate on products or innovate on technology. I think every founder today has a chance to innovate on org design, and that starts by just thinking about what is the type of company we want to build today? What does it mean? And when it comes to the management later, what type of sort of leaders do we hire? What does it mean when it comes to hiring specific roles and specific functions? All of that is a chance for you to be very thoughtful and build a company that you're excited to be at for hopefully many, many years to come.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:07):
So what I'm hearing here is manager, there's no pure managers at Gamma and your plan is to not have people that are just managing the ideas. Everyone, even a manager is doing their own IC work.

Grant Lee (01:42:18):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:19):
And then the other piece of advice here is just generalists. People that can do a lot of stuff, and I hear this a lot on this podcast just like everyone is, there's no more just like you're a designer, that's all you're going to do. Designers need to build stuff, market stuff, write some PRDs probably.

Grant Lee (01:42:34):
Just one thing to add is that's where we are at today. I think being adaptable means that certain things may evolve and change and how the player coach model evolves and maybe in certain functions or as the team scales, that's not going to be practical everywhere. I think the reality is you just have to know and be willing to adopt different frameworks over time and being honest with yourself with what's working, what's not. I think we're constantly trying to learn and evolve ourselves. I think we're doing it in a way that we don't believe it really has been done before, and so we have to kind of pave our own path over time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:10):
I love that. Giving yourself an out when the time comes when you need to just hire managers.

Grant Lee (01:43:14):
A year later when you invite me back, I'll say, "Yeah, this is what we learned."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:16):
Yeah, that makes sense. That's probably going to happen. It's like people are like, "We don't need product managers." [inaudible 01:43:22] "I see. Maybe we do." Yeah, that makes sense. One last piece I want to talk about is you have this really cool quote that you shared on Twitter. " When you find someone exceptional, bet big on them." This is a big part of your philosophy is just bet big on the people that are doing super well. Just talk about what that looks like and why that's so important.

Grant Lee (01:43:40):
Yeah, I mean this starts top of the funnel, which is you meet candidates, you decide who you actually hire. And so if you don't start with a high bar there, going back to what is the goal? The goal is to hit a hiring target versus maintaining a super high quality hiring bar. Those are different goals and I don't think we've ever kind of dropped our bar. And so then you bring somebody in that you think is exceptional, that brings something unique to the table, that can be a good teammate. When they're thriving, you just give them more and more resources. I think what you realize, another sports analogy is when you're on an A team for instance, or a team that you feel like is exceptional, A players want actually more playing time. You never see a star player that says "I actually want less playing time."

(01:44:26):
They want more time on the field, they want to actually go after the hardest problems. They want to be able to feel like they're making a huge impact. And so if you have fewer exceptional teammates where you can just throw almost anything at them and they'll figure it out, that feels for you as a team, just feels great because then they get what they find rewarding, which is the ability to go after hard hairy problems and to be able to come out through the other end feeling like they've accomplished something. And I think that for us has always been something that goes beyond just almost everything else. We give people a chance to really thrive in this environment and we try to nurture that as much as humanly possible every step of the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:45:04):
Is there anything else around hiring that you think is really important or a big lesson you've learned or lesson you share that we haven't talked about yet?

Grant Lee (01:45:12):
I mean, there's some of these intangibles, which is for the founding team, does this feel like this could be your life's work? When you're pitching a potential candidate, does this feel like something where you're actually committed? The unfortunate side of a lot of what's happening in the AI world broadly is I think you're coming to learn which founders are sort of missionaries versus mercenaries. And many that were just chasing maybe just a big outcome, or something shiny, or something to feel good about themselves, they'll go off and then the company, I guess doesn't live on or maybe has to find a different way, a different path.

(01:45:47):
And so something I admire is you look at some of the founders, obviously before this sort of AI era, folks like Dylan or Melanie, Figma, Canva, Ivan at Notion, they've been doing this for over a decade now. They had many chances to just leave and sunset off into doing whatever they wanted to do, but they care so much about the mission, they've stuck it through. And I think when you're talking to candidates, candidates can kind of tell, is this something the founders even care about? And I think you're going to have a better chance of attracting true missionaries, people that want to build with you for the long haul, if it's authentic and it's something you actually care about.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:46:24):
Oh man, I keep saying this. I feel like we could have at least five more hours of stuff to talk about. That'll be good content for when you come back and you're making a billion dollars a year. Before we get to our very exciting lightning round, Grant, is there anything else that you think is important for people to hear? Any last, I don't know, lesson you want to double down on? Anything you want to leave listeners with?

Grant Lee (01:46:48):
Yeah, I mean, just going back to the original story of that was probably the ultimate low point. Having an investor that spent 20 minutes listening to my pitch, telling me that it was the worst thing, worst idea in the world. I think throughout the journey there's going to be those low moments. And when I think about being a founder and working a startup, you're honestly just trying to increase your luck surface area as much as possible. And for me, luck surface area has two dimensions. The first dimension is people. Who are you surrounding yourself with that share your same ambition, share the same values, same principles, and find those people and then give yourself enough time to prove that you guys can accomplish great things. I'm lucky to have two amazing co-founders. We've been working on this thing for five years. There's 0% chance we'd be where we are if I didn't have them. And we've had to overcome a lot. But I guess for us it's like creating that own luck over a long time horizon has been the only way that it's been possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:47:48):
Well, it's clearly showing in the success you guys are having. Grant, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Grant Lee (01:47:56):
Yep. Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:47:57):
All right. I've got five questions for you. First question, what are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Grant Lee (01:48:07):
Yeah, so I'll give one that's for pre-product market fit folks and the one post-product market fits.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:48:07):
Perfect.

Grant Lee (01:48:12):
Pre-product market fit I would say is Shoe Dog, which is written by Phil Knight, founder of Nike. And he talks about two things. One, you should chase your sort of crazy ideas, but these should be ideas you're passionate about. He was an athlete, and so not surprisingly, he focused a lot about creating tools or shoes in this case for other athletes and was passionate about that. And the second thing he taught me was going back to the team thing, he surrounded himself with other people that were super passionate about athletics and shoes as well. And so the folks that he had as his initial startup crew were all that.

(01:48:49):
And I think that gives you a chance of overcoming a ton, where you're focused on problems you actually care about solving, and you're dealing with a team that shares the same ambition as you. Post-product market fit, there's a book called 7 Powers by Hamilton Helmer, where I think when you think about how to build a durable business, there's so much in there. I think there's a lot that you can kind of read and reread as you kind of evolve and hit new milestones yourself. And so much of that can be both tactical but also zooming out and thinking about what are the big picture strategic questions you as a founding team you need to be thinking about. So both are great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:49:21):
Hamilton was on the podcast, we'll link to that episode. I also love that book. Many people mention it. Next question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Grant Lee (01:49:31):
Yeah, The Lazarus Project is one, I'm a huge sucker for time travel and sci-fi, so this is one I just started watching. And for me, it has all the right ingredients for a fun show.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:49:44):
Is there a product you recently discovered that you really love?

Grant Lee (01:49:47):
Yeah, I mentioned this already, Voicepanel. So again, a full disclosure angel investor, but we've been using it and going back to kind of being a cheat code for folks that are starting to experiment a ton with different ideas, vibe coding, maybe some of these might get this into the hands of users, hear what they think about it. I think, and honestly can help speed up a lot of things and save you time from wasting time on the wrong ideas or ideas where there's no market.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:50:13):
Is there a life motto that you often find yourself coming back to in work or in life?

Grant Lee (01:50:18):
Yeah, so there's this Chinese idiom that my mom used to say, it's a [foreign language 01:50:24] which the translation is "A frog at the bottom of a well". And the story is like there's a frog at the bottom of the well. He looks up every night and he sees the world and he imagines he knows everything about the world. And then one day a bird comes along and describes all the things that he sees, the ocean, the mountains, and the frog realizes that what he sees is just such a limited part of the world and the bird asks, "Do you want to come join me?" And kind of see the rest of it. And so frog goes along.

(01:50:54):
And so for me, I came from a pretty modest childhood. My parents, we didn't have a whole lot and I think it would've been very easy to kind of have a very narrow lens on the world and be like, "Oh, this is what it is." But my mom never allowed me to do that. She always pulled me to dream much bigger to say, "Hey, the world is vast. It's your opportunity to seize it. You have to go out there, don't have a narrow view of what's possible. Always dream bigger." And so for me, that's always carried through and every time I feel like I'm thinking too little or too small, I try to zoom out and remind myself that there's much more out there to go after.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:51:30):
That is so good and so important and so valuable in today's world where so much more is possible. Just like, most of what limits people it feels like now is just, I don't know what idea I have. I don't know what to do. Now you could get things done so much quicker and so much more is possible. So that's such valuable thinking. Okay, final question. You help people present better. Your tools basically help people become better presenters. What's one tip you've learned or one tip you teach people to become better presenters that might be helpful to listeners?

Grant Lee (01:52:00):
Yeah, I mean, I'll go back to the consumer advertising concept, which is one idea at a time, this notion of you give them one egg, someone can catch it, give them too many eggs, they're going to drop it. So don't try to throw too many concepts all at once. Keep it simple. People will appreciate it. And so with every sort of presentation, break it down into the core concepts, try to make sure you're covering one at a time. And I think once you sort of see a through line there, then it becomes easy for it to package up into something that feels more cohesive.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:52:32):
Less is more, as they say.

Grant Lee (01:52:35):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:52:36):
Grant, two final questions. Where can folks find you online? Where can they find Gamma? What should they know? Just plug anything you want and then how can listeners be useful to you?

Grant Lee (01:52:44):
Yeah, so you can find me on both Twitter and LinkedIn, DM's open. I honestly hear just knowing how hard the journey is in general, whether just thinking about a startup idea or you're deep into startup land, I want to be hopefully helpful. I'm going to be hopefully your biggest cheerleader, so let me know how I can help. And then for us, we're always looking for feedback. So if you're trying Gamma, it's falling short of your expectations, let us know. We'd love to help in terms of just trying to make it better. And yeah, really appreciate all the feedback and support along the way.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:53:16):
Grant, this was awesome. I really appreciate you making time. I know you're trying to build a crazy fast-growing startup with a lot going on, so I really appreciate you making time for this.

Grant Lee (01:53:24):
Thanks, Lenny. It's been a blast.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:53:24):
It's been a blast for me too. Bye everyone.

(01:53:29):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:00:00):
If I drill down what makes companies fail, it's quite simple. It's just like they don't talk to users, which means they don't find product market fit. And if they don't find product market fit, nothing else really matters. What mistakes do people make is like it is all about that. It's all about talking to customers and learning that you're building something that's actually useful. YC Slack headline is make things people want, and it's still true and it's always going to be true.

Lenny (00:00:30):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Gustaf Alstromer. Gustaf is a group partner at Y Combinator where he's been for almost six years. Prior to that, Gustaf was at Airbnb for over four years where he started the original Airbnb growth team and where I was very lucky to get to work alongside him for a number of years. Gustaf is also at the heart of YC's increased focus on climate tech, and in my opinion is one of a handful of people who've had an incredible impact on the increasing amount of investment and people flowing into climate tech.

(00:01:10):
We chat in depth about what's happening in climate tech, why things have shifted so much recently, what's new and exciting, and how to think about the space if you're hoping to make the jump. We also get deep into Gustaf's experience working with over 600 startups over his time at YC. We talk about what are the most common mistakes that early stage startups and founders make, what advice YC partners give founders most often, the most common attributes of successful founders, the importance of having a technical co-founder and why that's the case, so much more. I guarantee you will leave this episode smarter and more inspired and I can't wait for you to hear it. With that, I bring you Gustaf Alstromer after a short word from our wonderful sponsors.

(00:01:53):
This episode is brought to you by Linear. Let's be honest, the issue tracker that you're using today isn't very helpful. Why is it that always seems to be working against you instead of working for you? What does it feel like such a chore to use? Well, Linear is different. It's incredibly fast, beautifully designed, and it comes with powerful workflows that streamline your entire product development process from issue tracking all the way to managing product roadmaps. Linear is designed for the way modern software teams work. What users love about Linear are the powerful keyboard shortcuts, efficient GitHub integrations, cycles that actually create progress, and built-in project updates that keep everyone in sync. In short, it just works. Linear is the default tool of choice among startups and it powers a wide range of large established companies such as Vercel, Retool and Cash App. See for yourself why product teams describe using Linear as magical visit linear.app/lenny to try Linear for free with your team and get 25% off when you upgrade. That's linear.app/lenny.

(00:03:02):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools while trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage. Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic clickthrough metrics and instead you turn north star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions, and payments. Eppo supports test on the front end, the back end, email marketing and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at getepo.com. Get, E-P-P-O.com, and 10X your experiment velocity.

(00:04:15):
Gustaf, welcome to the podcast.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:04:17):
Thank you, Lenny. Honestly, it's so great to see you. I'm excited to be talking to you.

Lenny (00:04:22):
I've been looking forward to this conversation for a while ever since we booked this. We worked together at Airbnb for many years. I was really lucky to get to work with you before you moved on to bigger and better things at YC. Speaking of Airbnb, you once tweeted about how special an experience that was for you, and I think even more interestingly, how many of the people that have left Airbnb can't find another place that's as special that just like that bar has been set too high. And so my first question is just like, what do you think it was that made Airbnb so special? Why was it such an important experience for you and other people? And even more importantly, just what is it that you take from that experience that you bring to startups that you work with now?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:05:02):
Yeah, it's funny. I think this year in a couple of months it'll be 10 years ago since you and me started Airbnb.

Lenny (00:05:07):
Wow.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:05:08):
It was 2012. The reason I treated that was I asked everyone that I'd met after Airbnb, because I had this experience of like, this was the highlight of my career up until then, at least being in the team like that and I asked everyone, "Have you found anything better?" Besides maybe one or two people, I haven't heard anybody say that they found something better. And they all missed that dearly. I thought a lot about why that was the case, but I would say Airbnb did not feel like a normal job. It felt like more like a group of friends trying to just do something together and we were friends. At least in the beginning it did not feel like this was a job. It was sort of like an ongoing project and an assembly of amazing people. I think in the end we managed to build two things, like a really successful company, thanks to Joe and Nate and Brian just for starting this. Without them there would be nothing to build.

(00:06:04):
I think people don't like to use the word family, but I feel like that way because when I go and meet with Airbnb alumnis from that team. We have a very special bond that reminds me of close social connections more than anything else. It does not remind me of coworkers. I asked myself why this was the case. The best answer I have is probably we brought in a special type of people. We had very diverse backgrounds. A lot of us was former founders. Not many of us were career people from the technology industry of the early days, not many of us.

(00:06:37):
I think that bar that we set, the first, I believe when I joined there was probably five or seven PMs and there was 30 engineers or something and you joined a little bit before me, those people set the bar or set the standard of what we were looking for afterwards. I think it took a long time to change that narrative. I mean, eventually you have to hire people that only had big corporation careers, but I don't remember we did that for a long time. When I actually read my goodbye note recently, my words there still means a lot to me and it means sort of like you're trying to reflect on exactly these things on like, building a great company that became successful and being part of this sort of family of really close friends.

Lenny (00:07:21):
So it sounds like if you had to boil down what Airbnb did, it sounds like hiring was the main piece that impacted the way it turned out just like the founders being very specific about the type of people they were hiring.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:07:32):
Absolutely.

Lenny (00:07:32):
Is there anything that's like, I don't know, a take away there of just what you recommend to founders, like hiring. People know, be very careful who you hire. The first, I don't know, 10 people will impact the culture long term. But I don't know. Is there anything just abstracting away there of just what to look for in that first batch of hires?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:07:50):
It's a tricky one because I would like to say that all the things that we did were the cost of the outcome of this, but that's not really how the world works. Some of the things we did work, some of the things that we did did not work. It's hard for us to actually disentangle what those things are, but I think we can talk about the things that we did. First of all, we made sure we hired people that were really excited to be there, right? They wanted to build Airbnb and they were really excited to work on Airbnb. That was the most important thing. Of course people had other offers, but I think you can figure out from those offers are you excited to be here or not. So that was probably the first thing.

(00:08:30):
The second thing I think is trying to understand the true motivations of the people that were there, like lower, "Why are you here?" We did something we call culture interviews that I think the founders have written about or there's probably content online about this. We did a lot of culture interviews early on to try to figure out we got the people that were there that mapped our core values and were really excited to work on Airbnb. I think finally, I don't know how this happened, we did pick people from diverse backgrounds. Most startups don't have most of the PMs being former founders, but I believe that was the case for the first 10 or 12 or 15 PMs at Airbnb. A lot of us were former founders. I think that that made a big difference for how you make decisions and how you get started on things.

(00:09:21):
I think I actually see this a lot in the Airbnb founders. They really care about the time at YC and they tried to recreate YC inside Airbnb a couple of times with demo day and with so new products completely isolated from the rest, starting with doing things that don't scale and talking to customers. So I think that that experience had made a big impact on them, but it's hard to say just these two things go and apply these things. It's actually kind of hard to say, "Well that will work at it as Airbnb." I think that's a really tricky question to answer.

(00:09:51):
The last thing I would say is Airbnb had an incredible business model, an incredible business from early on and it was hard to fail. What I mean by that is it's hard to fail with a company. You can fail with individual things inside the company, but a company was still going to succeed. I think we all felt that. A lot of companies don't have the ability to take risks like Airbnb did early on because they don't have something that's so obviously great.

Lenny (00:10:18):
That's a really interesting point on the last piece that you may have the most amazing culture and hire incredibly well, but if the company doesn't work out, it's not going to be looked back as like, "Wow, that was an amazing experience, but we failed."

Gustaf Alströmer (00:10:18):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:10:30):
Yeah, that's interesting. So you mentioned YC and this kind of is a good segue to where I want to focus most of our time. You mentioned that you've worked with over 600 companies at this point, which is absurd. It feels like it's you get some statistical significance on takeaways at this point of what works and doesn't work. So I have just a bunch of questions about your experience working at YC and with all these companies. The first is I think about this quote that Elad Gill tweeted once and he wrote, I think, a post about it. Elad Gill is a legendary angel investor. He said that starting a company is an act of desperation. You're either desperate to change the trajectory of your career or you're desperate to make a bunch of money, you're desperate to achieve some kind of mission or build a specific product that you're just like, "I need this to exist." I'm curious if you agree with that sentiment and then I have a follow-up question around that.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:11:20):
Yeah, actually I haven't heard it before, but you know me, I'm an optimistic person. I think it probably reflects on my view of this question, but I would say desperation sounds like a negative place that you're starting at. I actually think that most people to start companies start from a positive place. But the motivations, I agree with what he said, can be very diverse for successful founders, right?

(00:11:41):
So we actually asked this in one of the early Group Office Hours sessions. We asked them, "Why are you doing this?" And we don't want to hear an answer like, "I found this niche of the market.' That's not the why. The why is like, "Why will you come in and work late after four years when you have no money left and everything's going to shit?", right? Then the niche market is not the answer. There's something deeper than that. We've learned that it varies a lot for people's motivations to start companies. Some of them just want to solve some technical problem that they feel are passionate about solving. Some of them want to prove themselves in front of others or prove themselves towards themselves. Some have grand really important motivations to change the world and they will say things like, "I want to give everyone water or I want to solve climate change or I want to democratize publishing." You can imagine any number of large ideas. Some people just want to start a big company and just want to be successful.

(00:12:44):
It doesn't matter, in my experience, what your motivation is. I don't think either of these motivations. It sounds like some of them will be better than others. In my experience, it's not the case. The motivation will change over time to just running this thing, right? Like once something becomes big, it's hard to think every day about exactly why you got started because the motivation is just like it can be fun and work on boring things because it's fun to build something big. Everything doesn't have to be shiny and big and grandiose because there are many ideas that are "boring," but just the idea of running the company becomes the motivation eventually.

Lenny (00:13:17):
That is really interesting that one of the main things you look for, it sounds like when you're interviewing, is how strong and durable is that drive to build this company. Is that what you're saying?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:13:26):
It's actually kind of hard for screen for motivation, I would say, in interviews because the purpose of this kind of Office Hour question is to highlight why someone is there and highlight the diversity of reasons people are there and sometimes even highlight from one founder to another co-founder why they are doing this. They might have never talked about this. Actually, surprisingly, often founders have not talked about why they're doing this. And just knowing why someone is here really helps with conflict resolution for example, really helps with understanding why someone is there on a certain day or something like that. So it's not something we screen for as much as I think we try to help founders discover this among themself and really know this about themself. I've just accepted that the motivations to start companies is widely diverse.

Lenny (00:14:13):
Do you ever discourage founders from starting a company when you see that maybe it won't be a durable kind of lasting motivation or whatever other reasons just knowing how hard starting a company ends up being?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:14:23):
It's a good question. I would say sometimes if someone doesn't have a motivation or don't know why they're doing this, they're doing this because they read that it would be a natural career step. So a good reason to not start a company is if you think of starting a company as a career step. Well, it is not. Because if it's successful, it'll be your entire career. It'll be 10 years most likely. And if it's not successful, then it's not something that people generally aspire to start. So non-successful startups. So I think people will start companies because this is sort of something they want to put on their resume. They have not understood what startups are or why you should do them.

(00:14:58):
Sometimes you can screen and kind of figure this out, but sometimes people don't even know why they're starting a company when they get started and it kind of gets figured out along the way. And that's okay. I don't want to discourage people who don't know exactly why they're starting this company just to start a company. They might figure out along the way and find the true motivation after doing this for a little bit or finding that it's really fun.

(00:15:21):
I think I discourage people to start startups if they have so many other things that are important than their life that are more important than the startup. So if there are financial constraints or family constraints or relationship constraints and they are going to trump this, then yeah, you should think a second time perhaps because startups are hard. They're much harder than a normal job. Equally hard if they're successful or failure, right? There's no middle way, we're like, "Oh, my company is doing great so I can chill." That doesn't work that way either. So I don't really discourage or encourage people, I just want them to have all the information.

Lenny (00:16:03):
You mentioned YC Office Hours and I had a question around this. I'm working on this piece where I'm interviewing a bunch of B2B founders of companies that are doing super well and I asked them a few questions like, "How'd you come up with the idea? How'd you find your first few customers?" it's shocking how many of them bring up a conversation in YC Office Hours as the most pivotal point that set them on the trajectory that they're on now. I'm curious what happens in these Office Hours? What are the most common pieces of advice that you give or maybe most surprising pieces of advice that you give in these Office Hours so that people can get maybe a glimpse into these conversations you have?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:16:43):
So at YC we have two type of Office Hours, two of the common ones. We have regular Office Hours, which is usually a one-on-one or basically the founders talking to me, or me plus another partner. They happen every week or every other week throughout the entire program. And they happen years after the program on the regular basis. Then we have Group Office Hours, which is you and six or seven other startups talking to us. They have [inaudible 00:17:07] a little bit different purpose. So the goal of the regular Office Hour, I always ask the question, "What's holding you back from moving faster? We don't want to hear updates, we don't want to hear strategy questions. We want to understand what's slowing you down or what's holding you back from moving even faster. You generally have a specific goal."

(00:17:27):
And I think that question of what's slowing you down or were holding you back crystallizes the priorities. There are only so many things you can do as a startup and there are only so many things that matters at that stage. And by asking that question, we can start digging into, "Okay, what's the goal? What are the things that drives towards that goal? What are the things that's slowing you down towards that goal?" Usually, the founders don't know what's slowing it down, so the conversation and us probing questions actually leads to us or them discovering what it is just slowing them down.

(00:17:59):
In the Group Office Hour, it's a little bit different. The Group Office Hour holds a couple of different purposes. One of them is if I think back on Paul and Jessica's motivation to start YC, this is a surprise to them, but starting a company is incredibly lonely. You can't really lean on your employees and say, "Hey, I'm feeling really shitty as a founder today. Everything is going to shit." Employees isn't going to take that well. So you lean on perhaps your investors, but they're not really available. But what you can lean on is other founders because they're all in the same situation. It's sort of like when you ask a founder the question, "How are things going?", it's so emotional for them to answer that question because it's never going well, right? It's never like, "Oh, everything is going fantastic." They might say that, but everybody knows all founders, when they look each other's eyes, then no, that's not the answer.

(00:18:48):
So founders have infinite number of problems that they're thinking about all the time, which is why they're allergic to the question, "How are things going?" But when YC started, we put all the founders in a group together in a room and they started learning that all founders, all companies are broken in some way, right? They're all having these massive problems and they're all feeling that anxiety when they hear the question, "How are things going?" And just hearing other founders explain their problems, perhaps solving their problems, is a really good way for yourself to both feel motivated to do it yourself and see how problems get solved when other companies are having similar problems. Nowadays because of the scale at YC, we group companies together that have the same problems or the same area that they're operating in.

(00:19:30):
The second thing that Group Office Hours do well is accountability, right? We ask you, "What were your goals? What were your goals for the last two weeks? Did you hit them?" And then that gives founders accountability because founders are competitive. They don't want to look bad. They don't want to come back after two weeks and say "Nothing worked," or at least like, "We didn't learn anything." They want to learn something and make progress whether it's positive or negative.

(00:19:54):
Group Office Hours to me is the most magical moment because it really creates this very intense three or four month period. Founders often come back to us afterwards and say, "Hey, we want to do that again. We don't have this really intense, really productive period. We don't have a program exactly. We have other programs, but we don't have anything exactly that mimics that experience." But we do encourage founders to continue with Group Office Hours after YC. Many of them do and many of them, ad hoc, continue to meet for years in this group setting where they ask the same kind of questions to each other, to hold themselves accountable, to learn from each other, and to just have someone else to lean on. I think this was unknown and somehow the world didn't know before that starting company is super lonely and you have all these anxiety. By just talking to other people who have the same problems, it's just one of the best thing you can do.

Lenny (00:20:45):
There's so many things that come up when you talk about this. One is I had a startup at one point and we worked in the coworking space. We joined the coworking space because we're like, "Oh, we'll meet other founders. It'll be social, we won't be alone." But it turns out everyone's just heads down, headphones on, "I don't have time for anything. I just need to work." It's like a microcosm of that experience that even if you're surrounded by founders, no one has time to do anything. They're just working.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:21:09):
You got to schedule it and force it and put the laptops on the floor and the phones on the floor and you just sit there with pen and paper. That's how you have to do it. We tried to mimic that as much as we could over Zoom. But honestly the best experience of this was in person, in a ring, in mountain view with no computers and everyone just paying attention to everyone. That was the best experience. Yeah, that's what I remember is one of the most meaningful parts of YC. I didn't have it myself when I did YC, but now everyone has it.

Lenny (00:21:36):
The other thing that's made me think about is someone tweeted once, "Don't ever ask a founder how they're doing or how it's going. It just creates all this anxiety because nothing's ever going great."

Gustaf Alströmer (00:21:44):
Don't do it. Everybody looks at each other's eyes and they know that they're allergic to that question.

Lenny (00:21:50):
That's hilarious. So just to summarize the questions you said you asked, the one is in the individual Office Hours, is what's holding you back. And then in the group setting, what was the question again that you asked?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:22:01):
What are your goals for next two weeks and what were your goals for the last two weeks and did you hit the goals? And if you didn't hit them, what came in the way of hitting the goals? It's very simple. That can uncover lots of problems that other founders are having exactly in the same way. Just by talking about the things that held you back or the things that allowed you to hit your goals, uncover something material for the other seven companies doing that in the ring.

Lenny (00:22:26):
If you kind of zoomed out a little bit and thought about the startups you've worked with, what would you say are the most common mistakes that early stage startups make broadly?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:22:36):
There's so many. I mean, this is how I initially learned about startups, by searching for that on Google and landing on Paul Graham's articles because he kept-

Lenny (00:22:45):
Wow.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:22:45):
I think I've written many articles about this topic because it is so common. So this topic can go on forever. But if I take the most recent experience I've had in YC, I would say startups fail, one, because they don't talk to customers. And if you don't talk to customers or users, you don't actually know what's important. If you don't know what's important, it doesn't matter what you build, it doesn't matter kind of what ideas you have in your head if you don't actually know what it is that you need to build and you don't validate with customers. That's where a lot of the failure stems from. A lot of early YC for us or early part of the program is us pushing and probing founders to be like, "Tell us about the conversations you've had with the customers. What did you learn? Can you show us the organizations?" Or like all these questions, like, "What are the software they're using? What are they paying for? What problems do they have? How are they describing the intensity of that problem?" So that's what we spent a lot of time early at YC.

(00:23:43):
After that, I would say one of the commons mistakes in... I'm not talking about generally startups here, I'm talking inside YC. The second most common thing I see in YC is people are just afraid to talk to customers. They're just not trying hard enough to get in front of customers. I think this comes from, technical people tend to think that software is just sort of solution to everything. But really what you should need to do is to talk to someone over Zoom or over phone or in person, even better. People are just afraid of doing that and they're afraid of being rejected. These are common, people that want to build good products are just really afraid of people saying no.

(00:24:25):
The problem is, which anyone who hasn't done sales before that joined YC, they realize this, is that if you take the average customer group in the world, 90% are not early adopters. It doesn't matter if you have something new and cool, they're just not interested. They are not incentivized to take risks in their job to try something new. They're just incentivized to not take risks and just continue what they're doing. Those 10 percents are the early adopters. They're The ones that you actually want to reach. But that means you have to reach 10 to find one. And then you convince that one person to get on the phone or a video call with you. And that takes work and it takes a lot of work. I think people don't really think of this. This is common knowledge, basic stuff for salespeople, but founders should never done sales before just get surprised by the percentages and the sort of what it means to do this.

(00:25:12):
If I think of more generally outside of YC, so these are two kind of things I experience within YC, but I think generally outside of YC, I would say the two most common problems the same one is not talking to customers, the other one is not being technical and not knowing what it takes to build successful technology company. It means having technical founders and it means being able to build the first prototype. This is something we screen for when we interview people in YC and we aren't accepting a whole lot of team that don't know how to build or get their first prototype built themselves because we know it is a super common value pattern.

(00:25:50):
I can go on and on and on and on for this one, but honestly if I drill down what makes companies fail, it's quite simple. It's just like they don't talk to users, which means they don't find product market fit. And if they don't find product market fit, nothing else really matters. What mistakes do people make is it is all about that. It's all about talking to customers and learning that you're building something that's actually useful. YC Slack headline is make things people want, and it's still true and it's always going to be true.

Lenny (00:26:23):
This is really interesting and good advice. It's interesting that... Like, "Talk to customers," people hear that all the time. They're like, "Of course we're going to talk to customers. We're going to do that of course." And your experience is they know this but they just don't do it probably because they're afraid. Maybe also because they think they already know what they need to build and it's like, "Yeah, we're good."

Gustaf Alströmer (00:26:41):
And you have all these validators, right? So the people are validating that even if you don't talk to customers, why has he accepted you? This investor invested in you. This investor said you were great, like blah blah blah. All these different validations that you confuse with product market fit, right? We have to remind everyone on the first day in YC, "None of you have product market fit because you probably don't," right? Almost nobody has. Because people confuse this external validation with the thing that matters the most, which is talking to customers and learning what matters. It's just like a thing that just keeps coming back. Some get really good at it. And that is the source of successful startups, is when you really get good at this.

Lenny (00:27:21):
It reminds me coming back to Airbnb, one of the most important moments in Airbnb history was Paul Graham telling the founders of Airbnb, "Where are your customers?" And they're like, "Oh, they're in New York" and he's like, "Why are you talking to me and not in New York right now talking to them?" And they talk about that all the time.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:27:35):
Yeah, it's absolutely true. I think he wrote the article Do Things That Don't Scale as a learning.... The learning there was the Airbnb founders doing the trips to New York and learning about how to build Airbnb, which is a very counterintuitive idea, which is when you have to spend the most amount of time with your customers. I think Airbnb is sort of one of the best stories inside YC of doing this well.

Lenny (00:27:57):
This also reminds me, I've been talking to a bunch of founders recently. I asked them, "How many customers have you talked to help figure out this idea?" So just the other day it was 150 financial CROs that they talked to before they actually started raising this round. Another company, actually two Airbnb guys that started, they actually ran ads I think on LinkedIn to find specific people to talk to and that specific role. And they talked to probably at least 100, maybe 200. So there's a strong correlation there.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:28:26):
Yeah, I think that's the volumes that people don't expect. They think they might have to talk to five, but I think you have to talk to 25 to 50. That means you have to reach out to a lot more to be able to get to people that are potentially early adopters. Those ones you talk to are also the ones that become your customers. So you are already doing most of the sales by just doing this work anyway.

Lenny (00:28:45):
Do you have maybe one tactical tip you could share of just either getting over your fear of talking to customers or just holding yourself accountable to actually doing it?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:28:55):
Yeah, I tell this story, I actually told this story yesterday. So remember when you sign up first service that's a cool service and you hear about in TechCrunch or something like that and then you realize you already signed up a year ago, right? And then from the founder's perspective, you sign up to something you never used it. So the founders who build those services, their inclination to think is that "Everybody hates me because they sign up and they never use me." They never use the service. The fear of that is that basically the fear of rejection. So if I put my thing out there and most people won't use it and they will tell all their friends how shitty this thing is, you should never even sign up for it, that's the fear people have, but the truth is that people sign up for it and be like, "Oh, I'm busy. I got something else to do." And they actually don't remember or care.

(00:29:43):
So whenever you sign for something that you signed up a year ago, think of yourself that that is the common customer experience, which is that you just sign up for a lot of stuff you don't even remember you. You never have this, "I hate this thing' reaction. You always have this like, "I'm indifferent to this thing. I don't actually care to even complete the sign up flow or try it out," right? I think that's the thing that people need to remember, is that the worst thing that can happen to startup is not that people hate what you're doing, it's that they're completely indifferent to what you're doing. It's not the worst thing, but the most common thing that happens is people just is indifferent. But it doesn't give you a second chance. Let's say, it always gives you a second chance and you really need to internalize that people have busy lives and if people don't actually use what you're building, that's fine. You can reach out to them a year from now or six months from now or two weeks from now and they probably will if you make some improvements.

(00:30:37):
I think people just have this fear that, "If I get a lot of rejection, that means everything is bad." But the rejection should be put in context to the early adopter idea and that most people who don't care are not early adopters, who don't want to dig into new things. And that the more narrow of a solution you have to a specific problem, the fewer people actually want to dig in. But that's where you have to start because you cannot build the whole thing right up front and make everybody loves you. That doesn't really work that way.

(00:31:07):
Even Airbnb was like air mattresses or staying in someone's homes when they're home. That was not the complete solution of Airbnb. But there were early adopters who dug in and be like, "Yep, I like that. I like those two things. I want to have people stay in my living room in my mattress." But that's not what Airbnb is about today, and a lot of those things were unknown at the time. But I think people are just afraid of rejection and you just need to overcome that fear and just learn that there's nothing that's really that bad that can happen when people don't use the service or sign up and don't care. It's not really that bad.

Lenny (00:31:42):
It reminds me of a quote that I always love for Mark Andreessen, that everyone's time is already allocated. They don't have space for your product right now. They already have plans for their day.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:31:42):
Totally.

Lenny (00:31:51):
And it takes a lot to convince someone to pay attention to anything. I guess that just comes back to why it's so important that your product is solving a real pain and not just a nice little toy that is better than what's out there, but not so much better that you're like, "I need this right now." So maybe just along those lines, do you have any thoughts on just the importance of that pain and just how critical that is?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:32:15):
I actually recorded... I'm happy of these videos, but I've recorded two videos on YouTube as part of YC Startup School last fall. You can go watch them on YouTube right now. One of them is how to talk to users and the other one is how you sell or how you use sales. The one about talking to users, I think there's a difference in asking someone, "Do you have a problem with X, Y, Z? Is this podcasting setup working for you?" And people say, "Yeah, it's kind of working." But if you are a podcasting setup experts and you watch people use some other thing that's really shitty, they might also think that it's pretty good. But you have to watch them do it. And the best way for you to figure out what is the intensity of the problem is not to ask them but to watch them or to watch them solve the thing that they do.

(00:33:06):
You know how a lot of non-technical people don't know how to automate things? So they will do the same thing in Excel like a million times by just tapping because that's the only thing that they know and they're not technical enough to write some kind of script to do it, and you just have to watch those people to just feel the pain. You can't actually ask them how difficult is it to do X, y, z because they won't even know that it's that difficult to them. So the best thing I've learned about how to discover the pain is to watch people, have them screen share, have them walk you through their daily workflow about the area where you're doing some discovery. That is the best thing.

(00:33:43):
I'll give you another example. So there's a bunch of waste companies that are doing EV charging for electric cars and they're like, "What are the problems in EV charging?" And I was like, "Just rent an EV and go and charge at all the non Tesla chargers and see what they say, see what you experience." And the truth is that it's just like garbage. A lot of EV charting systems are just so shitty and the apps are terrible. You just have to just use them yourself to know how bad it is.

Lenny (00:34:13):
It's cool how often it just comes back to, "Just go do the thing. Do things that don't scale." Classic YC advice. I want to come back to something you mentioned that I want to pull a thread on as the technical co-founder, being technical early on, just to cover that. So I know YC looks to... Having a technical founder is an important variable in you're deciding to accept a company. Say someone doesn't have a technical co-founder, do you have any advice for what they could do, like what often can work?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:34:41):
Yeah, I think the first thing is to understand the value of technical co-founder. So some people who are in this situation where they have an idea of something they want to build and they don't have anyone to help build them in building it, I had a friend Paul who gave this incredible quote, he said, "I have an idea for a song, I just need a musician to help me make it," right? That's kind of similar to how it is with engineering. If you view output of engineering as like, "I just have an idea for a song, I just need someone to actually make it for me" and then you're not valuing software engineering or mechanical engineering or any engineering skill set deep enough, right?

(00:35:17):
The truth is that the engineering part is the really hard part. The first thing I would say is you need to learn how to value the engineering piece. Let me give you an example of how you don't do that. You applied to YC and you have 90% for yourself and 10% for the engineer. You're basically saying that like, "Oh, the engineering part of this company is only worth 1/10th of me. I'm the non-technical person." So that to me is a signal that you're not really valuing engineering.

(00:35:44):
Okay, so how do you go out about and find someone? Well, the truth is that there are a lot of technical co-founders. The technical people, they also want to find business co-founders. They don't want to do other part. They don't want to do sales and they actually don't really care that much about fundraising. They just want to solve the problem. And that's fine. We built something called co-founder matching where those funders can meet, but if you don't participate in that, you can just start by asking the best technical people that you know. "Are you interested in starting a company with me?" Same thing with rejection. Many of them will just say, "No, I have a great job, I'm really happy." But some of them will have thought about starting a company for a while and was hoping that someone would come and ask them to do that. So you have to remove your fears and go and ask the best people.

(00:36:29):
The reason you want to have a technical co-founder and not a hired engineer or not a hired contracting team is because so many of the decisions you're going to make are technical and so many of the iterations you're going to make relies on engineering. And if you don't understand that, you won't actually make the right decisions anyway. It's not like service. You have an idea for a product, you build a product and you're done. There's infinite number of iterations in that process.

(00:36:54):
And then finally, I would say a lot of people learn how to code themselves, right? So there are a lot of places online that you can learn the skillset that takes to build a prototype. You might not be the best engineers. So there are many successful startup founders who are not the best engineers because they stop coding when they hire three or four engineers, that's fine. But you need to be sufficiently good that you understand the value of engineering and that you understand that the best way to solve most of the problem is with software. There are a lot of founders who just, for whatever reason, study something else that doesn't have to be a conscious or very precise reason that you had when you were 18 or 19 and then you're 25, you're like, "Oh, I wish I know how to code" and then just learn to code and they learn how to code. It's not that more difficult than that.

Lenny (00:37:42):
Have you ever seen a startup work out if they had a contracting firm, like engineering firm build a product? Does that ever work or were you just like, "No, do not ever do this"?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:37:53):
Basically, I can't recall any specific ones where people have a contracting firm but I've recalled founders where let's say you had two non-technical founders, but they valued engineering and they had an ability to build a team of great people that were not co-founders and they gave them equity and they become successful. There are many examples of that I would say, but I don't remember any specific examples where you had a contracting team building the whole thing. I think the reason for that is it takes more than just sort of riding a spec to build a product. You can't actually spec yourself to a great product. You have to just be part of the iterations yourself. That's why I think someone being the engineer, having the idea of what iteration looks like and just doing it is how you do things.

(00:38:38):
I think that the cases where I've seen non-technical founders make this work is that they have really good engineering teams who feel like they're founding team. It might not be co-founders per YC-7 definition of having 10%, but they feel like they're the bonding team.

Lenny (00:38:52):
This reminds me of a story of just the recent podcast interview I did with the CPO of Calendly. She talked about how when Calendly started, they actually had a Ukrainian dev team built the first product. Not only did they help them build the first product, they actually ended up driving all the growth initially because they saw Calendly and started using it within their firm.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:39:14):
Wow.

Lenny (00:39:14):
And then everyone that they knew started using it and spread within Ukraine and they actually continue to work with that firm. They're still the [inaudible 00:39:20] team for Calendly or some part of it.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:39:22):
Wow.

Lenny (00:39:24):
Yeah

Gustaf Alströmer (00:39:24):
Wow, that's cool.

Lenny (00:39:24):
There's a success story.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:39:26):
I mean, I would say it's certainly the case that in some countries people have other jobs while they start the startups, so like the engineers. In Ukraine for example or in Eastern Europe, it's very common that if they start their own startup, they actually have a full-time job as a contractor while they're starting the startup because that's how you pay the bill because often you can't raise money. And that's fine too.

Lenny (00:39:46):
Amazing. That's some hustle.

(00:39:49):
This episode is brought to you by Pando, the always on employee performance platform. How much do you love the performance review process? Yeah, it's time-consuming, subjective, biased, and there's rarely any transparency. With the rapid shift to distributed work, it's a struggle to create the structure and transparency that you want to help your employees have the highest impact and growth in their careers. Pando is disrupting the old paradigm of performance management, including a continuous employee-centric approach so employees stay engaged, see their progression in real time, and know exactly when and how they can level up. With Pando, managers can leverage competency-based frameworks to effectively coach and develop their teams and align on consistent growth standards resulting in higher quality feedback and higher performing teams. Visit pando.com/lenny for more info and get a special discount when you sign up and reference this podcast. That's pando.com/lenny.

(00:40:47):
I want to zoom out a little bit and ask another big question and see what answer you have for this. If you just think about the most successful startups in YC or even just the companies you worked with, if you had to pick just one or two attributes of what's most common across successful companies, what would that be?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:41:04):
I would say the most common reason that I've seen founders succeed or companies succeed, it comes down to the founders and characteristics of those individuals. The most important characteristics of those individuals are they're really determined to win and they don't give up when things are hard and they have an internal motivation that's just really infectious to people around them, which is how they end up building really good teams around them. People are actually going to want to go and work for them. I have numerous examples of people like this where the CEO or one of the founders are just really inspirational people.

(00:41:42):
The second thing I would say is they are technical. So that's kind of like they're technical enough. If I would grade companies on a scale of technical to less technical, more technical founders are more likely to succeed, I would say. And then I would say they figure out how to talk to users and move fast early on so they don't wait for permission from their investors or from YC or from someone else to make progress. They're like, every day or every week there's continuous progress. They're not doing this for someone else, they're doing this for the customers. They're not doing this for the investors, that's for sure. The investors are sort of in the way more or less. And they're just naturally focusing on the customers.

(00:42:29):
Finally, what I would say is the skill that's really attributed to great founders is excellent communication skills. So the ability to communicate really complicated ideas clearly, to enjoy the communication part, right? Enjoying communication is often kind of correlated with enjoying doing fundraising, which is an important part of some companies' success. Not all of them, but for some of them. I would say communication or storytelling is part of the same arc, right? And those are part of the same thing that actually motivates people around you. If you can communicate why you're building, what you're building and why it's important to the world, tell a story about that, that can motivate people around you to just want to follow you. I think it's rare that I've seen founders succeed where the founder isn't in some way an inspirational person or someone that is a good communicator. Most of the time, you at least have respect or you somewhere know that they're going to succeed, right? And that is what inspires you to be around them or be on their team.

Lenny (00:43:33):
That is a really cool list. So just to summarize, one, they have the strong will to win, and with that they're inspirational. They kind of pull people along and get people really excited. Two is they're more likely to succeed if they're technical and can build a thing. Three, they figure out how to talk to customers, don't wait, just start doing it. And they're just obsessed with that versus what investors want them to do and they don't want to talk to the investors to make time for the customers. And then excellent communication skills, which comes back to the first. They're able to story tell and get people excited. Is that right?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:44:06):
Yeah, I would say those are the attributes of successful things. To be a super successful company, there's something else that have to happen. Those things are not things you can put on a list because they are the outliers, right? If you look at startups on a typical YC batch, there'd be a couple billion companies. Those are the outliers. They'll almost certainly have all the things that we've talked about. Many other companies in the batch will have that too, but then what makes someone a true outlier is something that is unknown. That's why so many investors said no to Airbnb when they were not trying to raise money because that was an outlier idea. It was an idea that was not logical and did not make sense to most people. Those kind of ideas, the ones that end up succeeding often don't make sense to people. There's some reason that no one has done this before because they're just not natural next step of the world.

Lenny (00:44:57):
That's a great segue to a question I've been meaning to ask, which is, how good are you at predicting in a batch which startups are going to be the monster hits? So maybe like you and then just generally YC, how good are you all at knowing what's going to work out, is going to be the next Airbnb or Dropbox?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:45:14):
I think the truth is that we're not very good at knowing what's going to succeed. Certainly we cannot figure out who's going to be the really successful company in the batch. That's not possible. What we're good at is knowing what failure looks like. What we sometimes like to tell founders at the beginning of the batch is like, "If you fail, please do it in some new exciting way. Not one that we've seen 100 times." Because we have seen people fail for a large number of reasons. The best way for us to sort of not predict, but the best way for us to make more companies succeed is to tell them how they might fail, right? Be very direct and honest with them and say, "You doing these three things, these things are likely going to lead that you won't succeed." And if we do our job well, most people get that feedback and they're on the track for succeeding.

(00:46:06):
Now, which of those companies end up becoming the best? There are so many things that are uncorrelated to being the best, and it's the things that people don't like. I'm in a hot industry, I was writing up on TechCrunch like, this investor started talking to me. You'd be surprised how many of the things I just mentioned are uncorrelated to outlier success, right? That's why it's so hard to actually do this. I think people really want these questions to be answered. People really want to believe that you can pick really great companies at the seed stage, but everything I've learned from the plus 600 companies that I've worked with is that it's just not that easy and it's maybe not even possible and certainly not possible when you talk about finding the outlier companies. I don't think it's that easy. And if it was easy, then we would accept a lot fewer companies. We just accept those ones, but it's just not that easy.

Lenny (00:46:59):
Do you have a sense of which ones are likely to work out better than others? Or is it just like, "We have 150 really unclear, but one of these, hopefully."

Gustaf Alströmer (00:47:09):
One good indicator is if each new Office Hour there is really exciting new stuff, right? We're not talking about the same thing we talked about two weeks ago or four weeks ago. They've already done that stuff, right? Like, "Oh, I was trying to sell to these three customers. Well, they already bought it. I'm not actually talking to seven others." And now we are talking about a different price and different product because they're like, they want more of what we're doing. If I'm experiencing that, and that's like a consistent trend, then when people draw this revenue graph of this 10% weekly growth rate kind of situation, those are the companies that we attribute that to. It's like if you're able to make that progress on that short amount of timescale, you are on track to do something well.

(00:47:51):
Now, a lot of other things have to go well for you to ultimately be able to succeed, but progress on this weekly or biweekly timescale is a really good indicator of someone who'll succeed. To me, much better indicator than I am in this market or I'm talking to this investor or something like that. But those are much worse indicators of someone succeeding than I'm making progress and it's pretty fast clip.

Lenny (00:48:17):
Interesting. And so what I'm hearing is at the beginning of a batch, we're just in a bet on a bunch of companies that have a lot of potential founders, technical maybe, they have the strong will to win and all these things. Through the batch, you're looking at the companies that are exceeding your expectations week to week in terms of progress that they're making.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:48:34):
I mean, sometimes it could be different reasons that people are not making progress. But if you are making continuous progress, and I think Paul and Jessica said this, this was true early days in YC, if you are hitting your goals and you're making progress continuously, if that continues, that's a really strong correlation to some success. But again, going back to the question, can we predict who's going to be the best ones? No. And that's why we really focus on trying to meet people not to fail. Especially good teams can't fail. If you have a really talented team who's really technical in how to build a product but they make some other basic mistakes, like not talking to customers or something like that or trying to build everything all at once, I feel like it's our responsibility to make sure they don't make the basics mistakes that we've seen many times. We need to help them at least make some spectacular mistake that we haven't seen before. Then that's a high potential team. If someone's on a good track for a decent idea but they're still early, that's a really good potential.

Lenny (00:49:30):
I have kind of a fun question that I wanted to try, which is kind of connected to this idea around attributes of successful founders and companies. So I had this founder friend named Flow, and he was asking me recently, "If you had to think about the most successful founders, which attributes do they have?" And he kind of gave me this list and it's kind of like two ends of a spectrum. So I thought it'd be fun to just go through this list and see, in your experience, which end of the spectrum, if any, are associated and correlated with the most successful founders. Does that sound good?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:50:01):
Sure. Sure. Let's do it.

Lenny (00:50:03):
Okay. So the first is speed versus quality. Is there end of the spectrum where you find that most successful founders are either speed-focused or quality-focused?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:50:10):
Sometimes founders ask us this question, "What should I focus on? Growth or retention?" And the answer is, they're asking us for permission to not do one or the other. The truth is, to succeed, you have to do both. I would argue that speed versus quality, there's different level of speed and different level of quality at different stage of the company. But the truth is that you always have to move fast and you have to understand what the meaning of quality is, right?

(00:50:35):
So I think I actually don't see that as a spectrum, but I would say if you move fast with talking to customers, you'll build something that have potential having quality because you know a lot about the problem. I think when people think about quality, they often think about, "What is my personal definition of quality?" I have a bar of quality, but quality to me of a good product idea, a good startup idea, has more to do with the customer think is valuable. And if you move fast by talking to customers and having customer learnings and know the problems, then you will actually come up with something that's high quality. So they're not at a spectrum to me.

Lenny (00:51:11):
All right. Let's try another one. Confidence versus humility as a founder?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:51:16):
I don't think that they're on a spectrum. I think that learning to predict confidence as a founder is critical going back to this communication piece of motivating people around you, right? I wouldn't want to join a company where the founder's completely not confident in their own idea, right? Because that is going to shine through. An investor isn't going to want to invest in someone who's completely not confident in that idea. So learning to first build your own confidence for what you're working on and then predicting that confidence to the people around you I think is critical. A lot of people will have doubt around you. And if you're not predicting that confidence, it's not clear that anybody else will if you're the founder. You're the one who's have to do it.

(00:51:58):
I think that you can predict that confidence while having a strong sense of humility towards the people around you. But I think when it comes to startups, learning to have that confidence is an important piece of the early days, right? And especially if you're building something that's very difficult, that takes a lot of work and a lot of money, protecting the confidence that you will succeed is critical for everybody that's doubting you. And those doubting you is a lot of people around you, right? And you just need to have an unnatural amount of confidence to prove them wrong. I think, again, this is not on the spectrum with humility. In fact, the most successful founders are often the most... You cannot inspire people around you if you don't have a strong sense of humility. People don't actually want to spend time with you, which means they don't want to work for you or invest in you. Again, you need both, but they serve different purposes when you get started.

Lenny (00:52:48):
Tough gig this founder life. You got to got to be everything. Let's see if there's a big difference in this next one. Execution and tactics versus focusing on strategy and kind of higher level stuff. How deep do founders go that you find that are most successful?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:53:02):
So this one actually I have a strong opinion about. I think that the reason that we talk about strategy a lot is because it goes back to business school. The origin of business school was to teach people to join the corporate world. And in the corporate world, strategy matters, right? So when you join a big company, you're employee number 2,010 or something, then you probably might have a business school job where thinking about corporate strategy is an important thing. When you are a small startup, strategy does not matter because there's not that much a strategy as about. Maybe later on you might be fruitful to think about strategy, but strategy kind of assumes that you can do multiple things at the same time, which small startups cannot. They can just do one thing at the same time. So execution is the thing that matters for companies.

(00:53:51):
Whenever someone wants to have a strategy conversation, it assumes that they don't understand their priorities. The priorities is always a list from top to bottom where there's one thing that's more important than the others. You can't really have a strategy session about the other things because there's only one thing to work on. So to me, a clear answer here is the good founders are execution-oriented and they just continually have one priority of what they're trying to go for. And then they're just hitting that priority all the time and then new priorities will come up and you don't really have time to have a discussion about company strategy. Company strategy also assumes that you have product market fit because you already have something that's working. If you don't have that, then getting to people wanting your product, that is your strategy. You don't have any other strategy.

Lenny (00:54:36):
Awesome. Okay. We found one that's quite different one on the spectrum or the other. How about autocratic and kind of like, I don't know, I think of Steve Jobs-like versus kind of consensus, collaborative driven, if this is a spectrum at all. And then where do you find founders might fit that are most successful?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:54:53):
I don't know if I have an answer to that question because I think when you work at early stage, you might look different than when you work at late stage. I don't spend a lot of time with founders that have thousands of employees and hearing how they are in the... When I talk to those founders, I talk to them one-one-one and I only hear from their perspective. So I don't actually know how they're peering in a large corporate setting. But when you're a small company, you're three people or five people or 10 people, you cannot be an autocratic decision maker. The founding team have a founding team decision making dynamic that could look different. Sometimes it's like everybody decides together on everything and sometimes you say, "I have my area of expertise and you have yours. We split it up, the decision making." Either of those things are fine. I think you just have to have a process so you don't rehash every decision after you made them a million times.

(00:55:42):
I would say the thing that matters the most at that point is to be willing to adhere to the process that you and your founding team have come up with. Your individual nature could be different in a different role in a different company. But for a startup to work out, you have to have a specific process on how you make decisions. Those are on a very short sprints, like weekly or biweekly. And everyone needs to feel good about decisions after the fact. At least they feel good about the process. I don't think that you can just decide... You can't also be fully collaborative, everyone gets decided about everything. So small startups agree on how they decide together. So after that, everyone just follow the process. That's usually how things work out.

Lenny (00:56:27):
Okay, I got one more. Cares more about the product or cares more about the distribution and growth strategy?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:56:33):
Well, there's a lot of assumptions built into that, I would say, because caring about the product to me is caring about the customers. Sometimes if I would say something like, "Oh, great founders care about the product," a lot of founders misinterpret that as in my personal perception of the product or my ideas of what the product is. And that's wrong. The right perception there is the expectations or the use of the product from the customers. So if you are meaning focus on the product or cares about the product in that sense that your customers care about, then absolutely, I think that's a really, really critical, important thing to have early on, like talking to users, doing things you don't scale. Once you get big, if you don't figure out a scalable distribution strategy, you won't succeed. And those are different for different companies, but they're not doing anything that don't scale.

(00:57:27):
Doing things that don't scale is not a scalable strategy. Eventually, something specific will be the things that work for you. If you're lucky, people will talk about your product and you'll have organic growth. But in many cases, that sales, that is some kind of consumer distribution strategy. You can't start with that. I've seen a lot, and this is when I had to reset my thinking coming from a growth team joining YC, is you can't start a startup ethic with a growth team mindset because that is just scalable things all the time. And really what you need to go back to is doing things that don't scale and unscale your way of thinking about customers. But it's really useful to have the growth mindset once something is working, right? Once you have thousands of people signing up everything every day, well how do you get to 2,000? Well, that's probably something that looks more like this thing that the growth team would do or distribution team would do.

(00:58:21):
I would say everyone has different experiences of this based on their prior experience, right? So if you work for a company that was infinitely successful, then you won't care so much about this. If you work for Google, you'll never even think about this because distribution is just the website. But if you work for a really small shitty product, then you think a lot about distribution because that's natural to you on how you succeed. So I think at the end of the day, talking to customers matters the most. That is what it means to care about a product to me. And then distribution is something that you will definitely invest a lot in once something is working.

Lenny (00:58:53):
Awesome. All right. I have probably a hundred other questions I want to ask along these lines, but I want to make sure we get to another topic which I know is near and dear to your heart, which is climate tech. So my understanding is you're instrumental in pushing YC to focus on climate tech as a focus area. I believe you led the charge on their initial request for startups I think is the term where you all put out like, "Here's who we want to fund." I think you've mentioned you funded a couple dozen climate tech companies and the last few batches, is that all generally correct?

Gustaf Alströmer (00:59:24):
First, request for startup was actually Sam Altman and a few other folks that was kind of that one who drove that. The second one that we wrote into our actual request for startup, I wrote that one, was carbon removal specifically focused on. And then naturally the people that apply with climate tech ideas get in my reading queue of applications and I read them and I interview them. Not all of them, but many of them. I think today we funded over 130 plus companies that are focused on climate tech in some way or another.

Lenny (00:59:53):
Wow.

Gustaf Alströmer (00:59:54):
The trend line is that really ambitious people who want to start companies in this area. Some of them want to start the companies because the climate tech is the number one problem, but they don't view this as a nonprofit. Now I want to really make this as a distinction. People somehow think that starting a climate tech company is doing good for the world, but it probably doesn't have a lot more than that. The truth is that the world have decided. Because climate is one of the biggest problems that we're facing, if not the biggest, we've decided that we are going to stop doing the things that we're doing and we're going to change our entire energy system and change all the things that we do that emits carbon. And we have just decided, governments have decided this. The question is how it's going to happen, but this decision has been made.

(01:00:42):
In that transition, we're talking about trillions of dollars of money moving from things that cause climate change to things that don't. The scale of this transition is not something we've seen recently. Like software is not that big in comparison. It actually is much smaller than this transition. So I think if you look at something like Tesla, which now has, I don't know, $600, $700 billion market cap, that's just one company that currently provides a couple percent of all the cars in the United States, new cars sold. And that is already one of the biggest companies in the world and has now the biggest, richest person in the world. We've only seen the beginning of this. The economical motivation be behind the decisions that people are making are just as strong as I want to fix climate change because this is just a really good business. This change have attracted a large set of software founders that you and me know that listen to this podcast that said, "My skills is relevant here. There are a lot of things that I can do. And if not, I can learn those things."

(01:01:43):
But most importantly, the skills of working for startups is really, really critical to join this transition. A lot of them have started companies or joining companies. I still get an email every week from some accomplished software engineer who asked me "Which software companies should I work for to fix climate change?" And I've gotten those emails for two or three years now. This thing just attracts really, really ambitious people. It's not stopping. It's accelerating. I feel lucky to work with so many of these great founders because they are uniquely interesting people.

Lenny (01:02:16):
I've noticed exactly the same thing of just how many smart, driven, amazing people are like, "I just want to move to a climate tech company. That's all I'm looking for now." Just to give you credit, I feel like you are ahead of the curve on the shift that's started to happen and pushed YC to focus on this really early. I always think like, "Man, I know Gustaf and I feel like Gustaf has made such a massive impact on the investment and focus in startups on climate." And so I just want to give you huge props for doing that and being so at the forefront of a lot of this.

Gustaf Alströmer (01:02:50):
Thank you. I mean, sometimes I'd say that it matters to someone who has the credibility of YC to start accepting these companies. It does matter. I remember when I spoke to Diego from Pachama in 2018 when he was starting Pachama, we were whiteboarding in YC. He was a YC alumni starting a different company. The word climate tech did not exist. People were unsure if investors would fund companies like these. Pachama's raised $60 million to have, I don't know, lots of big customers, lots of employees and it's clearly doing really well. But I think at the time of 2018 it was kind of unknown. One of the reasons it was unknown is we had this previous bubble, clean tech bubble, in 2008, 2009, 2010 that didn't work out because of a number of specific reasons and investors were just afraid of funding things because they had some scar tissue or scars from this previous thing that happened.

(01:03:46):
Now that turned out upside down. The number of new investors that are investing in climate tech is as big of a trend as any other trend we've seen in the last decade or two decades. There's just an enormous focus on the investing side. Most recently, me and another guy, David Rusenko, wrote this request for startup, a new updated, very detailed list of... I hope we can post it in the show notes, a very detailed list of ideas or areas where we think it might be worth looking If you want to start a company.

(01:04:18):
Now, we don't know what good ideas look like. We don't know. But we can tell you where all the areas of opportunity exist. We should go and look for good ideas. We wrote this because in response to all these people that come to us and say, "I want to work on climate tech. I don't have a good idea because I don't have any specific experience in this stuff." And then we're just like, "Don't work on these three things but go and work on any of these 25 directions." It already has generate a good response. I think it'll generate more response. But I think it's important for YC to tell the world that we look and fund these things. And that's always been the reasons we had requests for startups, is to let people know that these are things that we actually want to fund.

Lenny (01:04:58):
I actually moderated a panel a couple weeks ago. This organization called the Climate Draft put together PMs that are in climate tech. A lot of the questions were just like, "What kind of background do I need to move into climate tech startup to start a climate tech company?" It's interesting, every single one again and again just said like, "Your actual regular PM skills is all we need." There's a lot of people already at the company that are experts in the science and that's okay if you have no experience. They just need the business experience, how to operate, how to execute, standard stuff that PMs learn. And so would you agree with that that you don't need to have this deep background in science and climate to move into the space?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:05:41):
Yeah, I would say if you were working on a software company and even some of the hardware companies, that's probably generally true. Absolutely. It's much more valuable to have that background than to have this specific domain expertise background. Those are complimentary. But as a PM, having the solid PM background is the more valuable piece I would say. Being a competitive PM, coming from a really good culture of product management, knowing what good looks like, that's invaluable to some of these companies because in the past they weren't able to hire these people. So I agree with that 100%.

(01:06:14):
In terms of founders, I've seen everything, right? I've seen people having some domain expertise starting a company and really succeeding. I've seen people who had no domain expertise and learned everything they need to know. Maybe they partnered up with someone who had a domain expertise and then succeeded. I've seen all of it and I actually think that you can succeed in either of these categories. You don't need the deep expertise. It depends really on all the area you're in. But someone like Pachama, Diego and Tomas did not have expertise in forests besides the personal experience. They just had a willingness to solve the problem and it really worked out for them.

Lenny (01:06:51):
You mentioned you have this list of areas you're excited about. I know we'll share in the show notes, but is there any you want to highlight, just like here's areas you're most excited about and want to fund and/or are there companies you want to mention that are super interesting and super cool in the space that people should know about?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:07:04):
We wrote the list and we are highlighting companies in each of the categories. I don't know if I want to highlight any specific categories, but I can talk about some of the things that we've funded in the past that has real legs. So here's how I generally think about climate tech. So we have to decarbonize all the things we do that emits emissions. That means we have to change a bunch of things in the world, change transportation, change energy, change homes, all of these things, or change how we heat homes for example.

(01:07:35):
And then there is carbon removal. Carbon removal is sort of like, well even if we do all of this stuff really well, it's probably not going to be enough. And because there's an opportunity and there's some evidence to suggests that we can actually remove carbon from atmosphere in some way or another, a lot of companies are also working on this at the same time. I would say we need to do both and they're not in conflict. We probably are going to need to do both. Well, we certainly need to do the first one.

(01:08:02):
On the decarbonization side, there's infinite number of categories of our society where we met a lot of carbon, right? So I'll give you an example. Shipping is a really big deal. A lot of carbon emissions come from freight ships around the world. That's not obvious solution how you would solve that because the kind of oil that they run on is really cheap and it's a very low margin business and they don't have a whole lot of incentives to change besides what is coming down regulatory. So it's not a national solution where someone to be a cool, someone will build a test off ships and it just work out. But the two companies to be funded in that area, one of them is Seabound who is building carbon capture and removal for ships.

(01:08:41):
The other one is Fleetzero who build electrical ships. Electrification is on and again and again and again and again and whenever it's being applied, turn out to be a more efficient way of doing whatever thing that you were previous doing with the combustion industry. It is almost no maintenance. It's cheaper to build. The batteries are more expensive, it's cleaner and it fits the carbon coal you have. There's just a bunch of benefits there, but there has limitations. Usually the limitations on electrification has to do with batteries. It's like how far can you go? Now that category is what I call the... Which is a very important kind of critical one, which is the carbon accounting and sort of the recommendation systems that help big company account for the carbon that they have and they are giving some recommendations of what you do.

(01:09:25):
So I'll give you three examples. We funded Unravel Carbon, which is carbon counting software in Singapore, focusing on Asia, probably the leading one there. There's company called Carbon Chain, which is focused specifically on supply chain and shipping and raw materials, stuff like that out of UK. And then there's ANAI here in the Bay area. Who knows how this market is going to play out, but this market has carbon accounting customer demand right now, right? So all the large companies of the world have other either promised the government, promised their shareholders or promised the public, or maybe even the employees, they go into decarbonize. They don't always have an idea how to do it. These software platforms is like the plug and play "This is how you do it."

(01:10:07):
And then I'll give you two examples of things you can go into if you don't have any specific domain expertise and just a good software engineer. There's a company called Enode. They are basically building Plaid for EV chargers and Plaid for home energy system. So if we imagine that the future of all homes or future of all charging of EVs is going to be a bunch of energy appliances that are run by small computers, they're all wifi connected, you can connect to them and do things, tell them to turn on, turn off, turn on when it's cheap, turn off when it's whatever, all these different things that are valuable for the energy grid. Then you need a software platform to connect with all of them. And that's what Enode has been building.

(01:10:48):
Another related company is called Static. Static is the Airbnb for EV charging in India. The reason that you need something like that is you don't have Tesla charging. You don't really have public charting in general. People don't have outlets in their garage and they don't have garages. So you need to build a new bottom up EV charging system or platform, and that's what Static has been doing. They're actually building out public charging infrastructure as well, but they have their own app. So if you use a Static app, they'll direct you to all the Static chargers. I believe that they're the biggest or the fastest growing EV charging network in India, which is the second-biggest country, if not the biggest country in the world right now.

(01:11:25):
So the potential of these ideas, even that they're doing well now is just infinite, such an enormous market. If you succeed in one of these things, I don't think we are going to have as many gas stations as we have today and different networks. We're not going to have the same in EV charging. It's going to be a lot more consolidated around the use experience of the end user and the app they open to do this stuff. So I'm pretty convinced that there's real big opportunities for software entrepreneurs to figure this out. There's some companies in the current batch that are focused on this too.

(01:11:59):
The final one I would mention is Heart Aerospace. We have a Heart Aerospace and the Right Electric and a few others focused on aviation. Aviation is another big difficult to decarbonize. Heart and Right are focusing on battery electric planes. So they're basically making commercial airplanes that fly on batteries and flying electric motors and it's incredible to see.

Lenny (01:12:22):
What a killer list. We're definitely going to include links to all these companies in the show notes. Something I was thinking about is, so one narrative violation you mentioned is that there's actually money to be made in climate tech. It's not impact-oriented market anymore. It might be worth chatting about why that happened, but the question I want to get to is also things are going well. A lot of progress is being made. People see climate change and it's like we're dead, it's game over. But it feels like battery prices are coming down, solar's coming down, wind powers ramping up, all these startups are investing. So it'd be fun to just hear what's going well and maybe what is there to be optimistic about, but then also, "Okay, yeah, things are going well, but there's still things that are not going so great and where we need to double down."

Gustaf Alströmer (01:13:10):
Two specific things that went well in the last say 12 or 24 months. First one was politics. So in the United States we got the IRA, which is like it's called the Inflation Reduction Act. It makes sense because shift into greener energy is going to actually reduce inflation because it reduces energy costs. But it's really a climate bill, right? It really is a bill that is focusing on onshoring, a lot of supply chain for the green economy and incentivizing a lot of this change that we just talked about. Whether it's carbon removal or home energy or home heating, whatever it might be, this bill addresses all of it and is massive. So that's one really good news. Politics didn't have a lot of good news in the US for a long time on this. Maybe not ever actually.

(01:13:52):
The second good news, and it's such a good news that Europe is now trying to conquer. They're not trying to counter the IRA with their bill because they're seeing some of the battery companies saying, "Well, I'll actually going to build the next factor in US, not Europe anymore. I changed my mind."

Lenny (01:14:05):
Oh, wow.

Gustaf Alströmer (01:14:05):
So Europe now has to counter with their incentives as well. The second good news is corporations are now customers. So maybe three or four years ago you went to a Fortune 100 company and you're like, "Hey, do you want to buy my XYZ decarbonation solution?" What it's like? The software platform or EVs or whatever it might be. They're like, "Well, talk to this person on this floor. Maybe they can help you." And this person was not really empowered to make decisions. That has changed. Now they're like, "Actually, we promised our shareholders to reduce emissions by 2% every year and we also promised the government and we promised whatever publicly to do that. So we got to do that." They're like, "Where do we start? What's the first 2% that we got to decarbonize? Maybe that starts with energy. Oh, we'll change our energy providers." But they are now showing up as customers, not just with LOIs but paying actual for contracts, right? Doing investments in these companies because they've all see the future and they don't want to be behind.

(01:15:02):
There's financials motivations for this. They want to get access to capital that has some strings attached to some of these things, but they don't want to fall behind. And then they don't want to be the Toyota to Tesla, where Toyota said, "We are not going to do battery electric." It's just like they're still saying that sometimes and everybody else is like, "Tesla is the one we got to copy because that's the one that's winning." All these corporations are really afraid of being the Toyota. They're really afraid of being the last one who's not changing and then the world will move past them and then they're going to die. So I think the motivation here is intrinsically survival and it's really about sort of adopting this because this is where the world is going.

(01:15:39):
I think these are the two best news. The thing that I think what... We also wrote about this in the request for startups. This is not a thing where you can convince everybody to just agree with you. And even if you did, people wouldn't know what to do. So you have to view this as an economical opportunity and say... We can't convince everybody that this is going to be the thing that's going to happen. It doesn't actually matter if you convince everybody. What matters is that sufficient amount of corporations are convinced that they change their habits. And then you can sell the things you're building to them.

(01:16:09):
As sort of founder, just focus on your customers and focus on B2B. That's what most people I recommend to do here because that's where most of the change is going to happen. That's why I'm really optimistic about these startups and these founders. What they're doing is, in my opinion, more impactful than someone running a campaign trying to convince some other people that this is a big problem. Even when people know that climate change is problem, they don't know exactly what to do about it. But the startup founders, they know.

Lenny (01:16:37):
You touched on this, but it feels like one of the biggest shifts is capitalism is kicked in and is now leaning into climate tech startups and that's-

Gustaf Alströmer (01:16:46):
Yes. Absolutely. Absolutely.

Lenny (01:16:48):
... making a big dent. Well, with that, we've reached the final part of our chat, which is the very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:16:58):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:16:59):
What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:17:04):
The first one I recommend, I think I have it here. Yeah, this one. It's called The 100% Solution. It's written by Solomon Goldstein-Rose. It's for people who think climate change is a problem but don't know what to do about it, or they're just kind of in despair or think they're like, "Ah, everyone are going to die," right? There are some books written where the outcome of the book is like, "We're all going to die," but the truth is that we're not all going to die. This book is trying to cover the 100% of all the solutions in detail, kind of much more detailed version of the request of Sharp that we wrote. It gets you freely optimistic. And I give that to anybody who's cared about climate change because it really lays out this from a very optimistic way of looking at the world. And that's why I recommend that book more than almost anything else. That's probably my number one book.

Lenny (01:18:00):
Amazing. I love that if just a one book, here's the book you got to read. I like that approach. What's a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:18:10):
Oh, I watched so much. I don't know. I love Emily in Paris on Netflix. I think I have TV serves different purpose for me these days. It's just like entertainment.

Lenny (01:18:22):
Yeah, I get that.

Gustaf Alströmer (01:18:24):
But what else movie do I watch? We watch the Everything All at Once. I thought that was a really good movie. That was-

Lenny (01:18:30):
Yeah, it might win Best Picture.

Gustaf Alströmer (01:18:32):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:18:32):
We have a drinking game here. People say White Lotus, we drink. And so you did not, that's probably for the best. Favorite interview question that you like to ask YC founders when you're interviewing them?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:18:43):
What have you done since you applied to YC on your product? What are specific things that you've accomplished since you applied? Because that usually is a month or two month months ago.

Lenny (01:18:51):
That's awesome. It connects so much with what you said earlier.

Gustaf Alströmer (01:18:55):
I hope the answer is like, "Here are all the things that we did."

Lenny (01:18:59):
Versus we just prepared for this interview.

Gustaf Alströmer (01:19:01):
Exactly. Exactly.

Lenny (01:19:02):
Most out there wild startup you have funded?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:19:07):
I think I would say when I stepped onto the hangar floor of Heart Aerospace. I can send you a photo. Literally, I am looking at an airplane that's being made and I'm like there's no SaaS company's office you can walk into and you just open your mouth and you're like, "What the hell is this?" There are a few of those companies that are space companies or airspace companies or something like that where it's just a different feeling that you fund them and you can touch it. I have a lot of appreciation for things like that now because they're much harder to do, but when you succeed, they're much more tangible and you can be like, "I have a tiny little piece in this space rocket or this airplane that we funded or this satellite above us." I really think that that's in some way a strong legacy compared to some other things that exist and just replace other softwares. And all these are better businesses, but there are strong legacies.

Lenny (01:20:06):
What's a pro tip for applying to YC?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:20:09):
Pro tip. Number one thing is go to YouTube and type in like... I think there's a video that we've recorded which is about how you succeed with your application [inaudible 01:20:18]. It's an hour long video that gives you all the pro tips on how to do it. We told people in advance, "Once you've watched that video, then see if you know anybody who've done YC and then reach out to them and maybe ask them if YC is right for you, but also ask them what's important for you to, as you kind of approaching applying to YC, writing the application, during the interview, what were the things that matter?" Those are probably the two things I would do.

Lenny (01:20:46):
Final question, what's one pro tip for visiting Sweden?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:20:49):
First of all, you should visit in the summer. It's a really good time to be there. It's a very different country in the winter. Try to go outside the cities into the nature and then prepare yourself for Swedes not all being Americans. They're a little bit more colder and have a little bit more distance to you and they don't randomly talk to you like I've learned to do here in America. I think you just have to go along with a little bit different of a vibe than you have here in the US. Most people actually love it. Most people who have just been, they love it, but most of them go in the summer.

Lenny (01:21:23):
This reminds me, I wanted to close it, but there's a tweet once about how in Sweden when you go to someone's house, they don't feed you. It's not expected that you will have food. You have to bring your own food. Is that true? And what's that about?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:21:35):
It's absolutely true. I actually gave an unconference talk about this topic. The unconference talk was all of the strange things to Swedish people do and why. If i would summarize it, yes, we do that. I actually experienced that. I went to a friend's house and they had dinner and I waited in my friend's room while they had dinner. That was just normal. And why did that happen? I think there's a strong sense of individual responsibility in Sweden, which kind of reaches over to unfriendliness, [inaudible 01:22:10] from an American or foreign lens because this is so crazy. But in Sweden it's just like, "Well, you take care of your kids. I'll take care of my kids." And it's not really a question.

(01:22:18):
I think that a lot of the motivations of why Swedes are strange, one of them is we don't want to be indebted to someone else. So we never want to feel like... Which is why you wouldn't... For example, if you go to a bar in Sweden, you don't buy a round, you buy your own beer because maybe you have to figure out the money at the end of the day, things like that. I think it's just actually quite individualistic society, but it's individualistic with heart I would say. There's a warmth to it, but it will definitely be appeared strange to people who don't really understand this. They think people are cold and they're just like they don't understand that there's actually a heart behind this stuff.

Lenny (01:23:00):
That sounds really smart, to be honest, the system. I would be into it, but I can see how people are very confused. Gustaf, I can't thank you enough for doing this. This was incredible. I know that people listening to this are going to leave informed, inspired, motivated, hopefully motivated to move faster and make more progress. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to learn more or ask you may be follow up questions? And two, how can listeners be useful to you?

Gustaf Alströmer (01:23:27):
I tweet sometimes on twitter.com/gustaf. The most useful things that I put out is probably on the YC's YouTube channel. So I record a couple videos on growth, on sales, on how to talk to customers. I actually send them to people all day long because the Start School videos that we made are a lot of preparation went into it and it answers most of the questions that people have. So watch those first, I would say. But yeah, sometimes I tweet other stuff that people can follow. That's fine. How can people be useful to me? I love hearing feedback from founders, what they're working on. I want to hear kind of questions they have about their companies. But I want to also really emphasize that to apply to YC, you don't need to know any of us. You don't need to reach out to us. It doesn't make any specific difference.

(01:24:15):
The principles in YC is that you should be able to become an insider in YC in Silicon Valley without knowing anybody. That's kind of what the application process is about. So feel free to reach out to us if you have questions, but don't feel like that's required to be a good YC applicant. It's actually the opposite in that we read and treat all the applications equally. Thank you so much for listening to this podcast. I mean, it made me happy you made all the way to the end.

Lenny (01:24:44):
Yeah, extra credit for listening to the end. I also just want to say while you're saying that, it feels like YC is such a good force for the world. It just enables so much innovation and progress. And if technology is what drives the world forward, IC is so at the center of a lot of that. So just huge props to what YC is doing and what you're doing, Gustaf.

Gustaf Alströmer (01:25:02):
We feel a lot of responsibility towards that. That's for sure.

Lenny (01:25:05):
All right, I'll let you go. Again, Gustaf, thank you for doing this.

Gustaf Alströmer (01:25:09):
Thank you so much.

Lenny (01:25:12):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Hila Qu (00:00:01):
... [inaudible 00:00:01]. Always say is actually fundamentally DLG, data led growth. So when you give away your free product, what you want to get in exchange are two things. One is a broader reach because free product spread itself is lower barrier to entry. Two, you want to understand you usage behavior of those free users, which features do they use and which features kind of correlates with a higher conversion rate, retention rate, all of that. If you don't have a foundation of data and understanding of how to analyze those data, you are giving a way of free product for nothing.

Lenny (00:00:44):
Welcome to Lenny's podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Hila Qu. I've heard some listeners have been doing listening parties with this podcast where their team listens to an episode all at the same time over Zoom and shares their insights and lessons in a shared chat. And I would say that this episode is a great candidate for that. It's incredibly packed with advice on how to start and optimize your product led growth motion. We talk through common pitfalls that you probably run into or to get started, feel us favorite tools, what you recommends for an initial PLG oriented team, how to audit your existing funnel, plus tangents on how to improve your activation and retention and some foundational overviews of product like growth and some of the core concepts associated with it.

(00:01:34):
Like I say at the end of the episode, this episode delivers tens of thousands of dollars in value. Something you won't find for free anywhere else. I am really excited to bring it to you. With that, I bring you Hila Qu after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:49):
This episode is brought to you by Amplitude. If you're setting up your analytics stack but not using Amplitude, what are you doing? Anyone can sell you analytics while Amplitude unlocks the power of your product and guide you every step of the way. Get the right data, ask the right questions, get the right answers, and make growth happen. To get started with Amplitude for free, visit amplitude.com. Amplitude, power to your products.

(00:02:16):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro and online collaborative whiteboard that's designed specifically for teens like yours. I have a quick request, head on over to my Miro board at miro.com/Lenny and let me know which guests you'd want me to have on this year. I've already gotten a bunch of great suggestions, which you'll see when you go there, so just keep it coming. And while you're on the Miro board, I encourage you to play around with the tool. It's a great shared space to capture ideas, get feedback, and collaborate with your colleagues on anything that you're working on.

(00:02:48):
For example, with Miro, you can plan out next quarter's entire product strategy. You can start by brainstorming, using sticky notes, live reactions, a voting tool, even an estimation app to scope out your team's sprints. Then your whole distributed team can come together around wire frames, dry ideas with a pen tool, and then put full mocks right into the Miro board and with one of Miro's ready-made templates, you can go from discovery and research to product roadmaps to customer journey flows to final mocks, all the aim Miro. Head on over to miro.com/Lenny to leave your suggestions. That's M-I-R-O.com/Lenny.

(00:03:26):
Hila, welcome to the podcast.

Hila Qu (00:03:29):
Thank you Lenny for having me. I'm so excited.

Lenny (00:03:32):
I'm excited as well. I don't know if you know this, but you have the very unique distinction of having two posts in my top 25 most read post of all time in my newsletter, which are the two parts of your series on how to add a product led growth motion. And so I'm really excited to dig into product led growth and help more people be successful product led growth.

Hila Qu (00:03:52):
Awesome. I should have made it three posts, three part.

Lenny (00:03:57):
I like that ambition. There's always more. Yeah. Well I think the next milestone is get into the top 10, get two into the top 10.

Hila Qu (00:04:06):
Yes.

Lenny (00:04:06):
Okay. Maybe this podcast will... Oh, okay. This podcast will be in the feed of the newsletter, so maybe we'll get there. No pressure. No pressure. One question I wanted to ask you is anything come out of writing those guest posts? Has anything good happened as a result?

Hila Qu (00:04:21):
I always take a very long-term view for writing. I enjoy writing myself. Spend actually four months on that one. After it's published, I see a lot of shares kind of and people writing very long summary of it. That's always very encouraging and also many people I didn't expect reading it reach out to me, let me know, "Hey, I read that." For example. I think Ravi, he is also on your podcast. I didn't know him personally, one day he's like, "Hila, I read that. That's awesome." And a bunch of friends in VC and they kind of read that. They told me it's great. I even have a advisory client kind of landed because of that as well. So it's awesome.

Lenny (00:05:10):
Amazing. It makes me really happy to hear all that. I was also curious, has anything, and we're going to get into the details of all the stuff you wrote about and even beyond what you wrote about, but is there anything you're thinking has shifted on having after having written that series in terms of PLG?

Hila Qu (00:05:25):
I wouldn't say it's shifted completely because I always believe you don't need to be a PLG purist. Meaning there are kind of people who are like, "PLG is the future. It's only thing, you don't need sales." Right? I was never like that, but recently by working with a few of my clients, I witnessed in reality many startups actually are having both. They have a PLG motion, they have a sales team as well. PLG motion is perfect for lowering the barrier for more people to try, broader the reach. It's a kind of volume kind of game. And then the sales motion, you can have very targeted list of big customers you go after, you close them and it's a big order. Usually revenue, a very strong foundation for a company. And I've seen actually a lot of my clients that are doing, they have both. They're doing that. They try to get the benefit of both from their early stage and it's super cool.

Lenny (00:06:29):
Is the simple way to think about this trend that eventually every one will need to do both. It's not one or the other, it's just both. And it's just a matter of when you add the other.

Hila Qu (00:06:40):
I would think so because let's say if you are in the sales motion dominated kind of traditional B2B software industry, your competitors will be adding PLG, as soon as they add it they will have a benefit of attracting more end users and end users become case to the employer, to the clients. And you lose that. And if you are only in PLG somewhere else may go after the big customers. It takes time for PLG to go to the big customer and close them. So you lose a little bit of time there as well. I think eventually you need both.

Lenny (00:07:19):
Cool. That's kind of the way I've been seeing it. I did a few series on traditional product led growth companies, [inaudible 00:07:28]. All those guys, and they all add sales teams eventually last famous for being product led only. And so everyone ends up adding sales team. I think more recent trend is sales led enterprise E products are all just realizing they need a product led growth component. So that's kind of what I've been seeing too.

Hila Qu (00:07:43):
Yeah, exactly. But I would say it is easier if you have PLG from early on. If you are pure sales led, you try to add PLG, that's the harder thing to change basically.

Lenny (00:07:56):
Interesting to set a little foundation. Before we get into a lot of this stuff, it'd actually be helpful just to explain what is product like growth, just simply, because people hear this term a lot and it'd be helpful just to understand it broadly. And then also just like why is it so popular? Why does everyone want a product growth component to their business?

Hila Qu (00:08:15):
Just use a simple example in B2C product. When you think about Facebook, when you think about a lot of the products you use every day as an end consumer, it's always by default product led growth because there's no sales team [inaudible 00:08:32]. The LTV of the product doesn't support that. I think PLG the term become popular because traditionally in B2B, word sales is the main motion. You need a sales team to close the deal After the contract is signed, the end users can now finally use it.

(00:08:51):
But nowadays, it's not necessarily a case. You can have your B2B SaaS product developed in a way to allow end users to try before you buy. So that's the reason I think this has become being more popular. And the fundamental driver behind this is the user of B2B softwares are also human. It's the same human using B2C softwares and we're already trained to use product, try, and before we make any decision. And we demand that in B2B as well. So it needs to happen. And more and more companies are capturing that trend basically, and they're trying to utilizing that as a entry point to either disrupt existing B2B players or build something really awesome for end users. So that's why it's becoming more and more popular.

Lenny (00:09:42):
To pull on that thread a little bit more even to help people visualize a product led growth product, what makes it product led? There's a self-serve component, what are attributes or just kind of common elements of something that's product led versus sales led? Let's say.

Hila Qu (00:09:59):
Yeah, definitely. I think maybe we can use a product as a example, right? Think about Zoom how me or you, maybe everyday users, how we get to know Zoom is not necessary through a sales team call me code or email me code and introducing me this, showing a demo of Zoom, and I get to know Zoom, right? It's because maybe Lenny, you hosted a webinar I joined and I get to just use this software already without even knowing it's Zoom. And then afterwards I may one day think about I want to do this myself and I just do that in a sign-up and I already create a host a webinar and I can pay if I need a paid plan or I can use a lot of more advanced features when I, let's say hit the 40 minutes limit, I can already click that and pay and become a paid customer already.

(00:10:53):
So I think the key properties also of PLG products, think about it should have a very low barrier to entry. Usually it has a free version, free trial. You don't need get approval from your boss to use it. You can use it today and then it has some sort of a self-service checkout flow. If you need a better version, you can buy yourself as well. And this product, basically the free product will spread on its own in some way or another.

Lenny (00:11:24):
Okay, perfect. I think that was really helpful. I think we dive into some of the meat of the discussion that we have planned and where I thought it'd be fun to start is the common pitfalls that people fall into when they're trying to add a product led growth motion. And so what are the most common ways people fail when they're trying to figure out product led growth?

Hila Qu (00:11:45):
The first of all, as I mentioned, you need to have some sort of vehicle. A lot of the companies, if you go to their website, especially B2B companies, you'll see the biggest CTA is called book demo. They don't have anything else. The first step for you to do is submit a form and kind of basically explain yourself to this company, I'm from who and who company and I want to use the tool, can you come back to me and allow me to see a demo of your product? That means the entry point to PLG is cut off. Instead, the first step is you need to either have a free product, free trial, some sort of a low barrier entry for anyone who stumble upon this product to give it a try. A lot of companies don't have that. That's the first I would say hurdle or peaceful.

(00:12:38):
And especially if you are a sales lead and you already have all those things figured out, you try to go to add PLG, it's not as easy as just say, add a kind of free trial CTA on your website. You need to build this free experience. You also need to convince your sales team, your existing product team, your marketing team, "Hey, let's try this out." Because before this process is super clean. Everyone only get only selected future leads and sales work on those. But now you need to allow more people in and there need to be more understanding of their behavior data, the process need to change. So it's actually a whole process. So I would say that's first one. And along with that is some companies didn't think it thoroughly and they are just kind of saying, "Oh, PLG is cool, let's do PLG."

(00:13:34):
And then they maybe spend three months build kind of some sort of a very basic free trial and then they think that's it. They think the leads will come, conversion will come, self-service revenue will come. It's not that easy. It's not that simple. It is definitely a entire motion. So I would say you need to commit to it. Maybe you can do some thinking, collecting some data, build your conviction, but to a certain point you need to commit to at least a year or even two years kind of roadmap to build this entire thing out and change the process internally sometimes as well to support that. The last one, I would say a lot of times the company's committed, they want to do this, but they don't know the right way or they don't have the foundation, they don't have the expertise of PLG.

(00:14:27):
Their internal team, they're really good at sales or maybe really good at as the traditional motion, but they don't have this part of expertise and foundation. A common thing I see is that company want to do PLG and they have no usage data at all and they're like, "I will just doing PLG. But PLG I always say is actually fundamentally DLG, data led growth. So when you give away your free product, what you want to get in exchange are two things. One is the broader reach because free product spread itself is lower barrier to entry. Two, you want to understand the usage behavior of those free users, which features do they use and which features kind of correlates with a higher conversion rate, retention rate, all of that.

(00:15:20):
If you don't have a foundation of data and understanding of how to analyze those data, you are giving a way of free product for nothing. Like you are really not being able to utilize all of that to build your PLG motion. So I think data foundation and expertise in terms of how do I design that user journey, that journey is very different from the sales user journey. Those are sometimes missing in company when they just begin to doing this. And in those cases I think it's super helpful to maybe either find someone who have done this as an advisor or hire someone like you need to have that expertise or through advisor to support your PLG motion.

Lenny (00:16:06):
This is great. We're going to talk about the data piece more in depth later, but on the commitment piece, I thought that was really interesting. I imagine many times founders or leaders think they have commitment and then they realize maybe not so much. Are there any kind of flags that tell you that, "Oh, you're not actually committed to working on this for a year or two years, whatever it takes."

Hila Qu (00:16:27):
The red flags I've seen basically sometimes, first of all, they think about PLG equals launch of free version or launch of free trial. They made this assumption in their head, "Oh, I already have a product. I already have a software that's working, customers are using. Now if I add a free version, if I open a free trial, that's it." Like that's basically PLG, and I will have conversions. I will have people becoming a product qualified leads just because I have it. "Hey, I open this for you, just come and use it and [inaudible 00:17:07]." And I think that's one red flag. Basically they are not thinking about the entire thing through understanding the implication, not only the free product, it's really just a start. You need to think about how to activate, how to design the upgrade path, how those teams, those new growth teams work with other sales and marketing teams, all of that.

(00:17:29):
So that's one. The other one is they don't have a dedicated team. They just basically assign one person to the thing. They are imagine, "Hey, you already have this. It's not that big of deal. You can just figure this out by borrowing resources from everywhere and try to coordinate all the stakeholders from sales, marketing, product." That person need to be a magician in order to be successful in that basically. And I think the third thing is basically they are really doing this because it's trendy. They didn't think about the deeper strategic reason why this is a good fit for their business. Do you have a product that's relatively low complexity, doesn't require a lot of customization for the customer to see value.

(00:18:19):
Time to value need to be relatively short or you can figure out a way to make it short. And then do you have a lot of potentially end user S&B business? They are interested in the solution. They want to try that out. If you do not have both, if you for example, develop a software for the [inaudible 00:18:42]. Companies like [inaudible 00:18:44]. Or defense companies, only three target customer exist in the entire world, you don't probably want to do PLG, right? So think deeper about the fit and then commit. And I would say those are the red flags.

Lenny (00:18:59):
Okay. So on that last point, I thought that was a really interesting, we talked about how every company probably should add a product led growth piece, but I think what you're also saying is actually not every company, there are some companies like defense contractors that are probably going to be sale led.

Hila Qu (00:19:15):
I think it's a spectrum. I would say the defense company, defense software company is a pretty extreme example. And of course in those case, I don't think it makes sense, but I think majority of B2B software, I've seen, you've seen, we've used even some more complicated ones. Like Salesforce used to be this example of sales motion. They're the pioneer of SaaS and they do this so well, but they begin to add look into sales service portal and all of that. And even a lot of the bigger players are looking into that. So I think majority of the B2B software, probably they are in the middle of the spectrum rather than the defense company.

Lenny (00:20:05):
You kind of shared some of the attributes of what allows you to be product led, like quick time to value. If you have this in your head, what are some of those bullet points of what you need to figure out for it to be successful potentially as product led?

Hila Qu (00:20:18):
The first thing is that have a... And you mentioned you are able to have a vehicle, have a free version, have a free trial. Sometimes it's a open source product. A lot of developer products start as a open source product. It has its constraints, but it is also a great kind of vehicle for PLG or if none of those are option, you can build a really realistic kind of experience. For example, I remember Amplitude, they are pursuing PLG now, but they used to have a lot of barrier. As an end user, it's hard for me to put that code into my product and see my data, but they build a really realistic interactive demo that's getting closer to PLG. So it's not PLG, but it's getting closer and you can already see the value and play with it yourself. So that's the first step. Have a vehicle.

(00:21:18):
The second step step is time to value. Basically, just because you have this vehicle doesn't mean people will come and use it and see the value. So you need to figure out how do you give your users a warm start and help them get started. I was talking with a kind of company today, they just realized we have this tool and when people come in into the free trial, they are asked to do some action, but nobody know how to do that. They may not have everything ready to take that action. So we're like, "What about we gave them some sample video or sample action they can try." Right? It's not the same as they do it themselves, but it's better. It's getting closer. And after that you can ask them to try the thing on their own and they need to do more work.

(00:22:07):
So kind of think about all the ways you can reduce time to value. It doesn't need to be this big aha moment in the first five minutes, but at least give them some mini aha moments, right? So that's the second thing, third thing is think about from there. If they get aha moment, if they want to buy, you need to have this self-checkout flow ready, self-service flow. It's the foundation, if you have it, it doesn't mean they won't buy immediately, but at least it gave them this option to do that themselves. And the fourth thing I would say, between this kind of activation usage, aha moment to this conversion moment, actually there's a big gap. And what is the gap? How you can understand the gap, how you can guide people around that journey is basically you need to have a very good grasp of data.

(00:23:03):
You need to have the foundation to understand their usage, their behavior, and then you can design a user journey in the product, in email, in all those tools to guide user to the next step. So have a very strong data foundation there. I would say. I think those are the main thing. And there are other things like your pricing need to be relatively simple. If your pricing is super complicated, they need to... Whenever they pick, for example, they try the product, they love it, they have a self-checkout flow, but in order to decide how much they need to pay, they need to send your sales some information, you need to do a quote, then that's broken, right? Or they're already confused about this process. So that is another kind of important thing as well.

Lenny (00:23:54):
Cool. So just to summarize, I took notes on this kind of the things that you got to get. If you want to add a product led growth component, there needs to be something free and kind of self-serve that you can-

Lenny (00:24:00):
... growth component. There needs to be something free and kind of self-serve that you can just start using on your own. There needs to be a quick time to value, there needs to be a self-serve checkout experience. You need a data foundation. I really love the way you phrased it where one of the benefits of product growth is the data component that'll help you understand what to build on, how to monetize these folks. And then the last piece is pricing that's simple, that people understand.

Hila Qu (00:24:23):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Just imagine you are building, selling something on e-commerce side. You need all of this, right. Just in order for the B2B buyer to buy your software in PLG motion, you need to make all those available to him. It doesn't mean if you view this, it'll happen, again, right. That's the data experimentation. A lot of that need to be there to support a lot of iteration and make this work.

Lenny (00:24:52):
Awesome. Okay, so we've been going in a lot of directions. We started with pitfalls and things you probably will... You'll run into that may set you off track. But let's zoom out again and let's get into, just say you're convinced we need to invest in adding a product-led growth motion to our product. What's the first step that you recommend for people to go down?

Hila Qu (00:25:12):
I think the first step actually, I would recommend founders and leaders to just understand what's PLG funnel, what's sales-led funnel with SLG funnel. Because I remember when I begin to work on PLG at GitLab, it was not that clear to me. There's a lot of things you can read, but they're not all super clear. What is PLG? How is that different? And through working on that myself, I begin to develop this conviction and kind of this clear picture. The biggest difference from SLG and PLG is that the sales funnel traditionally work like something... You have marketing team working on the top of funnel, bring visitor and then they need to have a process to turn the visitors into lead. And leads is something, it is basically very popular and vitally used in the B2B business. And you go through some qualification process and leads need to be from your target kind of customer, target industry.

(00:26:23):
The company need to meet certain size, but they also need to show interest. And how marketing team historically gauge interest is how much they interact with your marketing campaigns. Do they open an email? Do they read three white papers? Do they go to this webinar? That's how they gauge interest. And for each positive action you did as a buyer, they add some points to you. And once you reach certain points, you become this marketing qualified leads. Basically those are the better ones we featured through that process and we gave that to the sales team. And sales team has more process, but then they choose some of them, work on them, and they close some of them. So that's kind of traditionally B2B sales-led motion works. And then product-led funnel is different. It's much more similar to B2C. Basically you can still have people visit your website and they sign up for free version or free account or free trial.

(00:27:21):
The most important thing, the biggest difference, is now you want them to use the product. You can still send all the marketing emails, all of that, but those are supplemental. Those are kind of trying to get them to the product to use, to try, and the usage, product usage, is almost like the leading indicator for success for PLG, versus in the sales funnel, it's almost like how many do you get and do they interact with the marketing campaigns, which in the old days it's what you have because nobody can access your product unless the contract is signed. But nowadays that's almost like an artificial barrier. It's not there. You can totally build a product in a free version to allow people to use. So usage becomes so important. And that's the biggest difference from the usage that you have two potential conversion paths.

(00:28:18):
One is that if this product is not that expensive, the price point fits in most companies' budget. Some companies may just use their credit card and they buy online. That's also, you then don't even need sales team to be involved. And it's very similar to the B2C product, e-commerce product, buying process. And it's awesome because it's automated, you don't need to have more sales team involved. It's low cost, it's efficient, it can happen on its own every day. It will just add up to your revenue. And then the other potential conversion pass is where the product usage is high, but also this customer, this potential prospect, fits into your ideal customer profile. It's from a Fortune 500 company or it's from a target industry that you know they need your solution. Then this customer worth more of your time and you should actually not, even if they may want to buy on their own, you may want to still have your sales team or have your customer success team to reach out to them to understand a little bit more of the situation and give them some white glove service. Hopefully you can even close a bigger deal than if they would have buy on their own. So that's another pass. I call that PQL, PQA, like sales pass.

Lenny (00:29:47):
And that stands for product qualified lead, right?

Hila Qu (00:29:48):
Product qualified leads, product qualified account. So the first step is for you to understand those two funnels and then think about if you want to add PLG, right? What is this journey? What are the steps along that funnel you need to establish for your product in order for your user to be able to convert in that funnel?

Lenny (00:30:12):
So you talked about these two funnels. One question is, are they basically the same for almost every product or should you try to figure out what's really unique about my funnel? And then second, is there an example of product that you think about like, here's the sales led funnel for them and then here's the product-led version of that, just to make it a little more real even?

Hila Qu (00:30:30):
Maybe I can give an example first and then we can talk about the other question. So I can use GitLab as an example since that's where I'm most familiar. GitLab actually have a enterprise sales team, very strong sales team, from the very beginning. But the company also we started from open source product.

Lenny (00:30:50):
Maybe describe what GitLab is for folks that aren't super familiar with it.

Hila Qu (00:30:53):
Yeah, so GitLab, we are a developer platform, DevOps platform, basically engineer teams, developer teams. They use this product to manage their entire DevOps process, from storing their code, kind of managing the version control, releasing CSAD, like security scan, all of that. It's an all in one platform for that team. So for the sales-led motion, like I mentioned, the teams, our marketing team, were working bringing a lot of visitors to our website and they sign up for free trial, for free accounts. And then we have this lead nurturing and lead scoring process to surface which are the good ones for our sales team. In our sales team, we have SNB, we have the mid-market, we have enterprise, and they each kind of took their buckets of leads and work on them and close them. They become revenue.

(00:31:52):
And then how the product led funnel work for us is someone, maybe as a developer, I heard about GitLab, I go to website, I see, "Oh, I can actually sign up for a free account." I may use it for my personal project. My company may be using another solution, but I have some side project I'm doing as a developer. I want to use GitLab to host that. And I did that. And so you begin to see this, individual users having some usage but nothing to do with his company. And then one day maybe this person's employer, "We want to look into some other solutions. We have way too many point solutions for each step of DevOps. Now we want to potentially consolidate them. So what are the options?" And this engineer raise his hand, "Hey, I have been using GitLab for a very long time and I really like it. I think we should check them out." And then this team, maybe this engineer manager or CTO depending on the size of company, they're like, "Okay."

(00:32:55):
He went to their website and he kind of signed up for a free trial because that allow him to test some more advanced features. It's 30 days, but he already has... This person knows how to use it. This person already set up the foundation with the free version and they started the free trial. They use their 30 day to do a proof of concept, the entire company already using it for part of their process. And they're like, "Oh, awesome. I tried this feature, that feature, that feature. It's a great tool. It can support our workflow and I'm pretty sure we should be able to get ROI from this product." And then in this case they are like, "I only need five seats. It's cheap. I will just go to the pricing page and check out the pricing and buy from there." Or in some cases, this is a big company and we see this big company is using our product, our sales team get that data signal, they may send an email and reach out and say, "Hey, I saw you were checking it out. How can I help?" And that may start a sales conversation, eventually become a contract from there.

Lenny (00:34:07):
Great. Thank you for sharing that example. Maybe a last question on this first step of mapping out the funnel. Do you recommend people just get in front of a whiteboard and just sit together and like, "Here's what it would be potentially if we added a product-led growth motion?"

Hila Qu (00:34:20):
Yes. Yes. And I think it's not that... The devil is in the details. Just mapping out the big steps is not that hard. You think about, " I have a marketing site already. I can build a free version." And then they use the free version and I build a checkout flow and that's it. That's the story. But that's the first step. If you don't even have those components, mapping out the funnel will allow you to see a missing checkout flow, a missing free version, you already identified that. But the devil is in the detail one layer down. How do you design an experience for each of the step? What do you say on your marketing side to drive free signup? In the free signup, how do you guide them to use the three most important features? And in the checkout flow, which payment option do you offer so that customers from everywhere can buy very smoothly? So that's the next layers kind of detail that actually has so many opportunities for optimization, maximization and all of that.

Lenny (00:35:29):
That's actually a really good segue to the next question, which is just, okay, you've mapped out the funnel, what do you do next?

Hila Qu (00:35:35):
If you don't have the foundational components, you need to build all of that. But if you have something, if you already have this funnel exist, right, it's just not working perfectly at least, but it's working, it's there. I think the next step is you need to pick a starting point. Where do you want to focus first to drive the maximum impact? Personally, I'm a big fan of finding leverage. I think doing growth is always about finding leverage. If you can always find the area that with relatively small investment can give you the biggest results, that can be such a kind of momentum, can empower you through future experiments and more work. And just finding leverage is a beautiful thing in my mind. So I always want to do that. So when I think about pick a starting point, one thing I actually do with a lot of my advisory clients as a first step is, we do a full funnel audit, full PLG funnel audit.

(00:36:38):
Think about, we go through me as a kind of end user, go through the entire journey, pretend I am interested, semi interested, and I want to buy from the website. Does that kind of attract me? Is it super clear the value proposition? And then from there, going through the sign up of the free account or free trial, is that smooth? And when I begin to use the product, do I get to my aha moment fast or I am very confused and frustrated, abandoned at that moment? And from there, if I'm like, think this is good, right, I hit my aha moment, I want to buy. Can I even buy? You will never believe, like when I do this audit,, there are so many low hanging fruits usually in this process. For example, one client, when I go to the checkout flow, the kind of checkout form is so confusing.

(00:37:38):
They ask a bunch of questions that only let's say UK customer need. Every other places they don't need to answer, but they ask the question anyway. And I as a US based person is very confused and I drop off at that point. And then there are other things, for example, the aha moments like I talk about. I don't know what to do when I land inside a product for the first time, I'm super excited and ready, but I don't know what to do. I'm so lost and confused. That's usually a pretty big focus area and opportunity area. Just getting your users to aha moments. They are already over so many hurdles here, but don't just turn down them and they leave because it's so confusing.

Lenny (00:38:25):
It might be helpful just to explain an aha moment. I know people hear this term a lot. What's a simple way to think about what is an aha moment?

Hila Qu (00:38:32):
I think it as a moment, as a first time a user experienced value of your product. So it gets popular because Facebook has this example from the early growth days. I think you added 10 friends in seven days, you hit your aha moment. But there are many layers under that. The reason why Facebook used that to define its aha moment is because in early days, if you add these friends, you begin to form some connection. You can see an interesting feed, you can interact with your friends, and that social interaction, it's the core value of Facebook, and Facebook leaves by looking at a lot of data. If you meet that data metric criteria it's kind of very likely you will hit that aha moment. But I think for a lot of, especially we're talking about many SaaS product, B2B software, the value of such product is usually either you see a workflow can be supported by this, it can save your time, it can save your money, it can help you make more money, or it just solve this pain point that you never get to solve on your own without a software product.

(00:39:57):
So at GitLab we actually did a bunch of analysis. We're trying to understand what is the aha moment for our new users. We ended up have something along the line of two users, two features used in the first 14 days. So it's very similar to Facebook's kind of format. But deep down, because we are a platform, we are a team product, two users is talking about the team components. Whatever the first user is trying and using that is so valuable, he or she is confident to invite another coworker to come in. That itself is very, very valuable action and indicates this first user is seeing value. And if together they use two or more features, that means we are seeing the collaboration, the platform components of the product. And within the first 14 days, because it has to be reasonably quick but not unrealistic, because we are a complicated product, we're not Facebook, we're not Zynga or a game app, it's hard for you to figure it out in the first day. So yeah, I think it's a very important concept for any PLG company to figure out because that's often the biggest opportunity area I see.

Lenny (00:41:24):
Aha moment and activation is often interchangeable, right?

Hila Qu (00:41:27):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:41:27):
So those are kind of two things you'll hear. And just to reframe, re-say what you say, so GitLab's activation slash aha moment milestone was two users using two features in 14 days.

Hila Qu (00:41:38):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:41:40):
And I imagine the way you got to that was you looked at what point does retention improve if they got to a certain milestone, right? Is that roughly how you [inaudible 00:41:48]?

Hila Qu (00:41:47):
Yeah, exactly. So there are how you can get to that, right? First of all, the internal team, our growth team, actually we did some brainstorming. We think about what are the potential action or behavior that indicate they're getting value. We ideally want to do something like they maybe successfully merge their first PR or they successfully run their first pipeline. All of that. There are some potential high value actions we can think of. We just list all of them. And then the next step is, we did a correlation analysis to understand, hey, those are the 10 high value actions we believe we want to look at. If a new user did this action, what's the maybe 30 day conversion rate and... Not 30 day, 90 day conversion rate. What's the 30 day retention rate? Because we look at both. Sometimes you only look at retention or you only look at conversion, it doesn't give you the full picture.

(00:42:52):
So we look at if you did this action, let's say if, Lenny, you are trying our product, you are able to successfully merge the PR in your first 30 days. Does that improve your likelihood to convert? Does that improve your likelihood to retain? And we compare across those 10 high value actions, compare with the average. And we begin to see, oh, some actions actually if you do that, it lift your conversion, lift your retention much bigger. And those are the candidates for potential aha moments. And from there, the reason why we ended up not picking one single action... For some products, actually you can pick a single action. If one action really stands out, I don't know, for Airbnb [inaudible 00:43:39] is probably, you book a hotel, you go to there, you are so happy, you leave a high star review. That's the key action for this platform.

(00:43:49):
For GitLab, we have so many different workflow components. Teams are here for different reasons. Some are here for security, some are here for like CSAD. So that's why we ended up combining like two action. It can be any of the two high value features. The next step is actually you need to launch some experiments to try to get more people to do those high value action. And you then see, do I see higher conversion? Do I see higher retention? Because in data you are only isolating correlation. You are not proving causation. You just saw people who are doing this are more likely to convert. But it doesn't mean if you get people to do that, they will convert. So experimentation is the step. You will finally kind of validate that.

Lenny (00:44:37):
Hila, this is amazing. This is like a mini podcast on activation. We should do another one just on this. And then in the show notes, I'll link to a couple posts that I've written with a bunch of advice on setting activation milestones and improving them. I forget if you've contributed to that post or not, but if not, we should add some of these stories. But let's get back to our core. We have enough to talk about on just product led growth. So just to summarize the audit that you do, I wrote some notes as you were talking, and maybe we can keep going from that point. What you look for when you're auditing a product to see where they may pick a starting point, what I wrote down is, one, are you just excited to try it? Is the landing page pulling you in? Two, can you actually use it on your own and just try it? Three, do you get to the aha moment where you're like, okay, I get it, [inaudible 00:45:25] it, and then can I actually buy this on my own? Is that roughly the audit? Is there anything more to that?

Hila Qu (00:45:30):
Exactly. And I also look at their initial first few emails they send to me, because sometimes the email magically can help a lot. If I'm frustrated the first time... The other day I'm trying a product, I'm frustrated, I'm like, I will give up. And then in the night I saw an email, I'm like, oh, maybe I just click the CTA and give it one more try. And that time actually I figured out I get to the aha moment.

(00:45:57):
So I also look at the email, the first initial emails, and then when I map this out, I ask the company to give me the data at very high level for each of the step. How many people are on your website? How many people go through signup? How many people hit this aha moment? We need to define that. We need to... Usually a lot of discussion, like how many people get to the aha moment, how many people started self-checkout and being successful. And then like that between my experience from a user perspective and the data, we usually immediately begin to see, oh, this is the biggest opportunity. Usually activation and conversion are two of the common starting places.

Lenny (00:46:42):
This episode is brought to you by Ahrefs. You probably know Ahrefs as one of the leading all-in-one SEO tools, used by companies like Facebook, Uber, Shopify, LinkedIn, Pinterest, and thousands more. But Ahrefs is not just for big companies. With their new Ahrefs webmaster tools, you can optimize your personal website like a professional for free. You can scan your website for over a hundred common SEO issues that might be hurting your performance in search engines, plus get advice on how to fix those errors. You can have it automatically browse your website's internal and external links, and get actionable insights from your backlink profiles, and you can learn what keywords your website ranks for and see how you stack up against your competitors. Visit ahrefs.com/awt and start improving your website's visibility. That's ahrefs. com/awt.

(00:47:31):
Okay, so let's get into that then. So you've done this audit, what other advice do you have for folks to figure out where they should start and invest in that part of the product to help launch product-led growth?

Hila Qu (00:47:42):
You can do a audit like this yourself, right. Just imagine if you are a B2C user trying to buy a product, you want it to be easy. Ideally, PLG for B2B can be that easy as well. So go through that process and identify, where is confusing, where do you get stuck? If you find-

Hila Qu (00:48:00):
... where is confusing. Where do you get stuck if you find that you have a problem with activation, meaning if you enter into the product you are like what do I do, I don't know what should I do, and maybe I just left. And then, if that's the biggest opportunity, activation, then you need to think about find the right aha moment metric as the first step, as we just talked about, because that's the success, that's the goalpost. And then, design a product experience to help more people together. And I usually think about do is better than show is better than tell, meaning you want to remove all the frictions and somehow give them a warm start, give them some sample template, give them some sample thing they can play with initially in that very moment already, and you can supplement that with your email to bring them to the product if they don't do that. So that's activation. If activation is okay, but your conversion, your self-check checkout flow, usually there are also room for improvement. Many company I work with, when I try to buy, I cannot even find where to buy. It's very hard to find where do I click to start this checkout process, or they may have some frictions in the checkout flow where it's not localized. One company, when I look at their data, they find that India has very low success rate, which is expected, but we begin to say it's because the payment solution they choose actually doesn't support that market well. And they added another payment solution, immediately they are seeing much better success rate. And if they're already in the checkout, you don't want to lose any of them, right? Just do a hundred experiments to get to as much higher kind of commercial possible, because you don't want to lose any of them. So activation, conversion, usually are two great place to start.

(00:50:08):
And then from there, I would say think about your PQL/PQA, motion, which is the other conversion pass, which is if you also want to have sales blended into this, right, product-led sales motion, how do you set up the structure, the foundation so that you can know what are some data signal to tell you those are better leads? And what are some customer criteria, in terms of size segment, you should set up, how do you get those data, and then how do you hand this to your sales team, how they can close using those data, use this knowledge? That's another very big opportunity area. That's a bigger effort, compared to those two low-hanging fruits.

(00:50:53):
And the last thing I would say, product-led acquisition is a great place to start. If your product is a collaboration software, think about Airtable and it's Figma, right? As part of my workflow, I invite my team to join, I spread this out. If you have that use case, you can build that into a product that's awesome, that's very powerful.

Lenny (00:51:18):
So there's a lot there. So let me try to summarize what you just shared and how it connects. So you have a self-serve product, you've gotten to a point where you can sign up and try something for free?

Hila Qu (00:51:28):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:51:29):
And then you do this audit of where along this journey do we think the biggest opportunities lie and the most leverage lives? And you have these, I think, four buckets of opportunity?

Hila Qu (00:51:40):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:51:40):
Acquisition, which is top of funnel, do you want to double down and invest there first, or activation, which is help people see the value more quickly?

Hila Qu (00:51:48):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:51:49):
Bucket three would be, you called it conversion, which essentially help them buy it more efficiently?

Hila Qu (00:51:56):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:51:56):
And then there's a bucket of retention, of just keeping them around longer, which I don't know if you mentioned this, but I know that's probably not where you want to start, so it's even not worth chatting about too much.

Hila Qu (00:52:04):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:52:05):
Cool. And so the question, basically, a founder or product team has to decide is which of these three buckets do they go in on when they're trying to add product growth, acquisition, activation or conversion?

Hila Qu (00:52:16):
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:52:17):
It'd be cool, maybe just one example of each of these three buckets, like what's a product that did a good job here? And then you also talked about how to know which one to start with. Maybe just again, just a quick summary of you should probably start activation if this, if you have something like that?

Hila Qu (00:52:32):
You should probably start with activation. Activation is actually a common good starting place for most B2B software.

Lenny (00:52:32):
Awesome.

Hila Qu (00:52:40):
Because usually B2B softwares are not designed to really get you to use quickly, historically. A good example, there are, I think, all the best PLG companies, they do a awesome job. That's almost like my criteria to say whether this is a great PLG product or not. Think about Miro, as an example. If you go through their activation experience and sign up to usage, they ask very limited questions, very targeted. They drop you, kind of, they ask you about your use case, what are you here for? Are here to do a brainstorm session? Are you here to develop a roadmap? And they quickly gave you templates to get started. Just like in maybe five minutes, you finish the entire journey from go to the website and sign up, answer a few questions, and you are already using the template they provided to do the thing you want to do. That's time to value. That's a success. I think that's a really great standard for all the PLG, like a B2B product, try to follow. So that's activation is usually a good place. If you don't know where to start, do that.

(00:53:54):
And then conversion, I would say, is a place, again, worth investing, but there are two layers. One is the self-check-hub flow, just do some experiments there. You can actually go to any E-commerce website, like, I don't know, go to Lululemon, go to Amazon, make your conversion process as easy as theirs. That should be your goal. The consumers shouldn't be confused about complicated pricing, where to find all of that, so that's a place always worth investing, testing more, because that's revenue so close to be added into your book.

(00:54:39):
And then the PQL/PQA part, the other more-complicated path, I would say that's something you want to figure out activation and self-checkout a little bit, and you want to have some reasonable user number and then invest there, otherwise it can be a little bit jumping too fast and jumping too ahead. And the acquisition, a product-led acquisition is a great place to invest, if you have a collaboration workflow, you have some inherent, internal viral components in your products. Think about Figma, think about Calendarly even, right? It can spread. This product is so easy. You can build something to allow it to spread on its own.

Lenny (00:55:24):
Okay. I'm hoping that was really helpful, because I think a lot of people are like where do I start, what do I do to help start moving down this road of product growth? And what I'm hearing generally is just activation is probably where you want to focus, which is essentially getting people to your value quicker. And what's cool about that, and we had a podcast with Lauryn Isford from formerly Airtable, now at Notion, talking about all the ways to do that. And interestingly, one of the biggest levers for retention, and moving retention, is often onboarding and improving activation, so win-win.

Hila Qu (00:56:00):
Yeah, definitely. And I could talk a little bit about retention expansion, if you think that's helpful as well?

Lenny (00:56:00):
Sure, let's do that here.

Hila Qu (00:56:08):
Yeah, I know that I didn't talk about that in the post, and there are people asking, hey, do you plan to write another post on this specific topic? So the reason why I didn't cover too much retention expansion is, as you mentioned, it's not usually a first place to start. I call retention the messy middle. It's actually a messy part of the entire funnel. A quick activation, conversion, those are fast. Those are almost sometimes shorter time span, right? You have a lot of never, and you can test very quickly, and that acquisition is a very big leverage. You need to get more users, always.

(00:56:48):
Retention is super important, but it's a little bit messy. It's over a very long period of time, and your customers can be, at any given moment, they can be retained or not, like if they just cancel or they just decided not to use anymore, you already lost them, so it's a very messy part. But how I think about retention, there are two steps. One is how to build a habit in their usage pattern, so that they are using this maybe every week, every day. The key to do that is, first of all, your product need to have a high enough frequency. If you are using this once per month, it's not likely you can build this into a habit.

(00:57:39):
Before GitLab, I worked at Acorns. We started as an investment app, and the whole thing is passive investment, passive investing. You bought some ETFs, and then you basically don't even need to check, and you just keep adding money and it will grow, and after 10 years is awesome. It's actually the right investment philosophy, but when I worked as a head of growth, it made a big challenge for me, because think about set and forget it. They don't even need to go back to a product to be successful. And that make it very hard, as a head of growth, to drive engagement, drive retention. I don't even know whether they're retained or not, if they are not coming back, right? I can only gauge from other indicators. So I think one thing I would say about building habit is think about how to build those habit feature or collaboration feature into your workflow already, into the product already. That is the reason they can retain, fundamentally, if it's high frequency, if it involves collaboration with other people, if it's part of their workflow. So that's the first step. You can obviously use a lot of the looks to reinforce that. You can send them an email if they take certain action, and get them back, and to repeat that action, but fundamentally you need to build that into your product.

(00:59:09):
And then the next part around retention is I actually think extension is part of retention. Basically you already have a steady usage flow. You are using this habitually every week, every day. What are the right moment to prompt you to think about maybe buying more? And there are three buckets of product-led extension. The first one is up upgrade to a higher tier. The second one is buying more seeds, buying more license. The third one is if you have some sort of a consumption add-on component, just consuming more, right? Like for GitLab, you can go from bronze tier to a silver tier, you can go to a higher tier, and then you can buy more seeds, and you can also buy more CSCD minutes to consume. Those are all the different moments. How you can do that is really understand data, understand usage, and trigger a lot of the right conversation at the right moment to the right person.

(01:00:17):
And you can, again, a lot of similar tactics you use in activation conversion actually can be beautifully applied in expansion, because it's almost a combination of getting people to the aha of that feature, use that feature, try that feature, getting them to convert.

Lenny (01:00:34):
You're leaving all these gold bricks that I have to resist not following and getting off track with, because there's so much, and like retention is its own conversation. We could have maybe just one question along those lines. What's something that you've launched that had a tremendous impact on retention? Is there an example of just like, wow, that really had a big impact, you talk about frequency maybe, but what comes to mind?

Hila Qu (01:00:56):
I can share some of my example at a course my-

Lenny (01:00:59):
Yeah.

Hila Qu (01:01:00):
I think there are two things. One thing is actually very similar to what you just said. When I was asked to work on retention, I did a bunch of analysis. The biggest leverage for me is actually activation. So I ended up doing tons of experiments in activation. I identified what are the features for users to take experience value quickly so that they are more likely to retain. For us, it's a feature called recurring investment, which makes sense in hindsight, but at that time nobody's caring about that. We have some other very cool investment features called roundup investment, so nobody is really paying a lot of a attention on this, but when I look at data, I saw recurring investment has a high correlation with retention. So I did a lot of work trying to get more people to set this up, and which has been a great success, actually, in a very short period of time.

(01:01:58):
And then from there, I would say we begin to add more use cases that has a higher frequency, like I mentioned, right? If you only come here once per month to check our investment, it's very hard to retain you. We don't have any lever to engagement with you as well, if you are not in the product. So we ended up adding IRA account, retirement account. We ended up adding spending account, like a debit card, like more high-frequency use cases. Those use cases come with higher frequency and better retention by nature, so now you change the problem from how do I improve retention to how do I drive adoption of higher-frequency use cases? So I did, again, a bunch of experiments how to drive more adoption of retirement account. Once you have a retirement account, an IRA, there's tax consequences, all of that. There it's very hard for you to leave. So you flip the question into, again, adoption/activation problem in that case as well.

Lenny (01:03:04):
Amazing. Thank you for sharing those. Oh man, there's so many other things we could talk about retention, but we have enough to talk about on product-led growth. So there's two other areas that I want to touch on. One is data and infrastructure, and what people should know about how to set that up for success, and the other is hiring your team, and how to build out your product-led growth team. So starting with the data piece, maybe just as a big picture, just like what are the buckets of data and infrastructure people should be thinking about that they're going to have to invest in or should start thinking about early?

Hila Qu (01:03:36):
I think there are two big buckets. The first bucket is product usage data. As I mentioned, a lot of B2B software, they're really lacking in that, because when you sell via sales team, you don't need to know so many details, so granular usage data, all of that. The second bucket is I call this customer 360 database, because product usage data is one component, is the most essential. In order for your product-led gross motion to be successful, you also need to connect that with your marketing teams, marketing campaigns, your CRM, your sales force, who are the customers, prospects, what their stage. So those ideally need to be connected so that you have a 360 picture of your customer. If I have an Airbnb as a potential, like a target account, do I know there are users from Airbnb that are using my product, which features are they using, and do I send any marketing campaigns to each of them, do they respond, all of that. All of those ideally need to be connected, but in reality is all over the place. It's all in its own tools in most of the B2B companies.

Lenny (01:04:57):
What are just some tools that you think people should check out, start with maybe? What's Hila's recommendations on an initial stack or areas to explore, in terms of tooling?

Hila Qu (01:05:08):
I say there are two piece. One is infra, the other piece are some tools that are kind of secondary. So from infrastructure perspective, on data tool, my first tool usually, one is some sort of data hub segment, right? This next one is some sort of a product analytics tool. Think about Amplitude. I know PostHog is actually a pretty popular one. It's an open-source product analytics tool. There are Mixpanel, Pandle, all of that. So have some sort of data hub, data collection tool, and have some sort of product analytics tool. That's the data infrastructure.

(01:05:49):
And then you need to have an experimentation tool because, like I said, you cannot just imagine you build everything and everything works perfectly. So you need either like Optimizely, I know Amplitude has some experimentation components. Eppo is a new and upcoming one. You need some tool to allow you to do experimentation.

(01:06:12):
The third piece I think that's pretty essential, I counted in the infra, is some sort of a lifecycle marketing tool. I know many B2B companies, they use HubSpot or they use something for their email marketing, but those are usually least nurturing. And it's very different from lifecycle marketing tool, meaning you need to connect with Segment, Amplitude. You know what customers are doing your product, your design, your email, your in-app, your push notification, based on their behavior, at the right moment, to the right person. And you measure success by do they take the right action in a product, versus the lead nurture email marketing tool is do I get them to read the article, open the email, I add 10 points to their lead score, and they are a next step further in their list funnel? So, data tool, experimentation tool, lifecycle marketing tool, those are the infra.

(01:07:10):
And then from there, there are a lot of PLD tools you can add on top to make your day-to-day much easier. Just to start, as so like that are most essential for acquisition, you need to have some sort of a like a data enrichment tool. Think about ZoomInfo, Clearbit, because the biggest difference between B2B and B2C is that you still need to know about their company. You want to know this person, but you also want to know this person's company, right? That's a very important thing, and you can get a lot out of those data enrichment tool, and then you can design your journey differently based on that.

(01:07:52):
For activation, a lot of my clients are finding a lot of value in those tools like Appcues, User-Led, basically the tools that allow you to build onboarding flow quickly in a product without engineer kind of resource. So you need to do some initial integration, but as soon as you did that a marketing manager, a PM or someone, can just build some customized onboarding step-by-step flows himself. I think that's quite neat, because you need to test the tongue in that area.

(01:08:27):
And in terms of conversion, I would say there are many product-led growth, product-led sales tools. I think those are great. If you want to build out your PQL/PQA conversion pass, think about Endgame, Pocus, Tableau and Pace. There are a couple of them.

Lenny (01:08:47):
Wow. Amazing. That was an awesome list and really well-structured. Is there anything else along the data or infrastructure piece that you want to touch on before we move on to hiring and the team?

Hila Qu (01:08:59):
I just want to go back to the point, as I mentioned, product-led growth is data-led growth deep down. So in most of the situation when I see a company want to get started, where they are really missing or they need to invest more, is data. So if you identify you have a gap in this area, don't feel bad as well. A lot of pretty big companies are in the same shoes, and if you can't invest the time, money, the team, the tool, to figure this out, the benefit of this, right, the data collection, understanding usage data, can not only power your PLG motion, it can really power your entire product team, even your customer success team. Now you gave them the ingredients they need to develop the next feature, based on not only what your top customer asked for, but also what everybody's using, right?

(01:09:59):
Your customer success team can take a much deeper view in understanding what the clients are using, rather than just talk with the executives from the client and get a rough gauge of the situation. So I think it is a area worth investing, and every B2B company should be investing in.

Lenny (01:10:21):
I'm trying to channel what listeners might be thinking right now, and I imagine some people might be like what if I pick the wrong tool? I'm kind of stressed, I have to do all this research. I'm kind of worried about starting, because it'll set me up for failure later. Which of these buckets do you think is most important to get right, right from the beginning, and any advice on how to just avoid messing that up?

Hila Qu (01:10:41):
To get started, I would say probably a product analytics tool is the first step, and maybe the data hub, such as Segment. So if you have Segment and particle tools like that, it allows you to plug into so many different tools. You can basically try all the different tools, and if it doesn't work, you just flip a switch, you can try another tool. So there is a benefit there, but it is expensive, so I know companies may just go right into the product analytics tool. I would say it's hard to get it wrong completely, right?

(01:11:19):
In order for a product analytics tool to be meaningful, the first step is you need to collect the data, you need to do some instrumentation, you need to have the foundation. And then, because it's garbage in, garbage out, if you send a bunch of garbage data into your product analytics tool, your analyst will be just even more confusing, right? It's like he doesn't know whether to trust the data, what to use. So a lot of company I work with, the first step is maybe not looking into tool, but do an audit of your data instrumentation situation, to understand how many of the key actions are intact, is the format correct, is the data, what are the gaps? And you may need to do some re-instrumenta ...

Hila Qu (01:12:00):
Right, what are the gaps? And you may need to do some reinstrumentation, reformatting and things like that before you even plug into a product analytics to make it useful.

Lenny (01:12:10):
For someone that may want to do that audit, is there a thing you would point them to, or, I don't know, a blog, a course, something to help them understand if they're doing it right? Or is it like, "Bring Hila on," and you need someone like you to kind of help them through it?

Hila Qu (01:12:24):
No, you can bring me, but you don't have to bring me. I think there are, if you search on Google just the data dictionary, or data product usage, data audit, a lot of companies published template and spreadsheet you can use. I can even send you a few afterwards.

Lenny (01:12:43):
That'd be amazing.

Hila Qu (01:12:44):
And then you can just scroll through. Basically the key idea is go through your product experience, identify the key actions, and go through your data instrumentation and see, "Do they match?"

(01:12:57):
And the success of this is you identify the gaps and eventually you want to establish something called the data dictionary. I basically do that for a lot of my clients. And the data dictionary will include, here are all the key actions, what's the event name for each of those, and what are the property and things like that.

(01:13:17):
But you now know, "Hey, I have this action track, this is the name. If I have a new product manager or analyst, we can all refer to this." And everyone know the same definition rather than people are interpreting differently. So that's a very important part to success even before the tooling.

Lenny (01:13:39):
Awesome. It also reminds me a previous guest, Crystal Widjaja, has a awesome post on why most analytics efforts fail. And she talks a lot about this, of how to set your events up for success. So we'll link to that as well.

Hila Qu (01:13:50):
Mm-hm.

Lenny (01:13:51):
Maybe one last thing here, I'm trying to think about what would screw people up most, and it's probably not having a data warehouse and ETL sorts of tooling in place, because that feeds a lot of this.

Hila Qu (01:13:51):
Yep.

Lenny (01:14:01):
Is there anything you want to add there about just the importance of a data warehouse and how to set that up?

Hila Qu (01:14:06):
Some of the early stage companies I work with, when they just get started in the very beginning, they don't have data warehouse. They just basically have their product and they have some sort of a Google Analytics or Amplitude, and that's it. It's pretty wild, but it's working and they can get to someplace from there.

(01:14:25):
But as soon as you begin to have data user, it's time to get serious to establish a data warehouse, have some ETL solution. I think there are the most common best practice ones, like AWS and things like that. There are also some startups that are doing this and you can utilize as well.

(01:14:49):
But again, as soon as you become a serious business, you should invest in that. Otherwise, it's pretty wild and it's pretty fragile as well.

Lenny (01:14:59):
And when you say AWS, you mean at Redshift, I imagine?

Hila Qu (01:15:01):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:15:02):
Cool. Awesome. Okay, final area that we have time for, which is awesome, which is around building your team. So maybe just two questions here. What is your advice for starting the initial team investing in PLG? How does that usually look and what do you think people should do? And then later, how does that evolve over time?

Hila Qu (01:15:21):
How I see most companies started is the founder or the leadership team realize that they need to do PLG. And they build a conviction. Maybe initially there isn't even a dedicated team, but they did something here and there, they decided to invest in this.

(01:15:40):
And the common place to start is to hire a head of growth, or it can be a lead growth PM, but someone who has a little bit of experience in this area. And then they begin to build this core growth squad as the first growth team. And I think that's a very common place to start.

(01:16:01):
The other place to start that's less common, but I also think it happening in reality, is maybe they will start a cross-functional, almost like a tiger team. Because if the initial focus area is, let's say, they want to do a product qualified lead, or basically add that funnel. That involves not only product team, that will involve data team because you want to know what are the usage pattern that indicate these is better leads. You also need to bring sales team in because they need to work on those leads to close them.

(01:16:39):
So if that's the initial starting area, a cross-functional tiger team is also possible option. But the most common way is hire a head of growth, usually a growth PM, and then start a team with engineering, design, data to support that core growth squad.

Lenny (01:17:00):
And the main difference between these two. One is dedicated, "We are going to dedicate full-time people to helping us grow." Like I say we talked about earlier, let's say they're going to focus on activation and that's their whole job. Versus tiger team is basically they're borrowing resources from other teams and this is kind of a side project for them.

Hila Qu (01:17:18):
Yeah. A little bit, for a period of time. So it's temporary. It's kind of they almost to want to get into... I would say usually the cross-functional team, the tiger team, is a little bit prior to a full commitment. They're pretty much committed, but they still want to try this out and get a final conviction, and then they begin to dedicate resources.

(01:17:43):
And you ask about how do they evolve from there.

Lenny (01:17:46):
Before we actually get there, maybe one more quick question. Which would you recommend? I imagine you'd recommend a dedicated team, if you can do that.

Hila Qu (01:17:54):
Mm-hm.

Lenny (01:17:55):
When would it make sense to go the tiger team route? In what cases?

Hila Qu (01:17:59):
One situation I would recommend is that if the initial focus area is, like I said, product qualified leads, the sales conversion path. Because if you think about you have a head of growth or a core growth PM, that person usually has a growth PM background and is in the product organization. And they're awesome if the initial focus areas are activation, conversion, those kind of involve a lot of experimentation. But activation and conversion are relatively confined, it's something the growth PM and engineer design data, they can work on.

(01:18:39):
If your initial focus area you felt like, "My biggest bit is actually do this PQL thing," it is a little bit harder for the growth PM to socialize all those cross-functional resources, because he need to get pretty deep into data. He need to have a counterpart in sales, even in marketing. So in that case, I think it's possible that maybe you start a tiger team.

(01:19:03):
You can combine both. You can have a growth PM dedicated, but have some tiger team to be working with him or her on this PQL project as well.

Lenny (01:19:14):
Got it. And I like this term tiger team, by the way. I haven't heard that before. It sounds like a lot of fun. Very dynamic. Okay, cool. And then yeah, what happens next after you have this initial team?

Hila Qu (01:19:24):
Once you have this initial team, it's important to give them the resources they need, and give them an initial focus area, give them support and a little bit time, allow them to try things out and get some early wins. And early win is the biggest thing I would say for, and whenever you start a new growth team, try to look for some opportunity, try to get some early wins in whichever focus area you choose.

(01:19:53):
And from there, if you get some of the wins, the team has some momentum, there are more confidence from the organization in PLG, right? It's time to potentially extend and formalize. So fundamentally I think you should not only think about the PLG team, you should think about the PLG org. Because PLG is a motion, it's cross-functional by nature, it's not just a product team or growth team.

(01:20:24):
Eventually you need to get to the place basically there is a head of growth product, that's the center of the PLG org. But there's also need to be a head of growth marketing, that's his or her counterpart in marketing organization. And then a head of product led sales, that's the counterpart in the sales organization.

(01:20:47):
Exactly where they sit, how they sit, it's different company by company. The most common one is head of growth product report to product org, head of growth marketing report to marketing, head of product led sales report to sales. But they have some sort of a very strong collaboration, because they are working in the same motion and same funnel. But I think that's next step, think about this org.

(01:21:11):
Once you have those counterparts in product, in sales, in marketing, the next step is think about what are the metrics they own to make sure you can manage this funnel, this motion, in the data-driven way. Because the PLG metrics are very different from SLG. The top of funnel is more about high quality signups. You don't want a lot of traffic, you want free signup, free trials. But it need to meet certain quality bar, it's not just anyone.

(01:21:46):
And then the head of growth product, he or her top KPI is about usage, activation. Activated teams is a very common metric. And then maybe number of PQLs, that's another. You want to get those teams to certain usage threshold basically.

(01:22:07):
And then the head of product led sales, he will be focused on converting those PQLs into revenue. So he will focus a lot on conversion rate, efficiency and maybe revenue, things like that.

Lenny (01:22:23):
Got it. And you're sharing a lot of org design verbally in the post, which we'll share obviously in the show notes. You can actually see a diagram of what these look like, to help kind of make it super clear.

(01:22:36):
I have maybe just one more question. Going back to the initial team, what are the functions you recommend they have on this like MVP PLG team?

Hila Qu (01:22:45):
The most important one is have a growth PM to be the lead, right? Head of growth, director of growth, lead growth PM. And then the growth PM, as you know probably very well, growth PM, he is a PM but has a much stronger skill set in analytics, experimentation, very data-driven. Think about metrics.

(01:23:06):
The growth PM's way of working is similar to other product manager, but his KPIs is actually more similar to the sales and marketing work. He's very focused on the conversion rate, the journey, the funnel versus the feature specifically itself.

(01:23:23):
And then the other functions you need to have for sure, I would often say actually a data analyst needs to be the very first hire. Sometimes even try to find a growth PM who can do analysis if you're really small, you can find that type of unicorn person.

(01:23:43):
Or even before hiring growth PM, hiring analyst, I would actually go as far as that. Because without insight, without a lot of foundation, your experimentation, your effort is really directionless in a sense.

(01:23:58):
So growth PM, analyst. And from there definitely you need some dedicated engineer, you need a designer. Designer can be somewhat not dedicated in early days, but engineer needs to be. Some sort of user research support as well, it doesn't need to be dedicated. But those are the core growth squad.

Lenny (01:24:18):
Okay. Real actual last question here for the growth PM. In your experience, are they most often coming from within the company already and they kind of shift to this role? Or do you recommend they find someone externally?

Hila Qu (01:24:30):
That's an excellent question. I have seen both. I actually recommend if you can find someone internally, maybe he's a PM, he want to do growth. Or he is an analyst who want to become more like a product role.

(01:24:48):
I even have a one client, the head of growth I work with used to be a investor relationship, like head of investor relationship. And he reports to the CEO and founder. He's very analytical. He hasn't been a PM before, but he can socialize the resource within the company to launch experiments in product, in marketing, in all of that. And I, as an advisor, will come in, guide him in the area he's not familiar with. And we actually drive pretty good results together.

(01:25:20):
So I think prefer hiring internally if possible. If not, if you really don't have anyone internally with that knowledge or with that interest, you can look outside. I would say map the initial growth PM hire to your starting point. If we already decided activation is the biggest focus area, try to find some growth PM with that experience. And if the conversion is a focus area, acquisition is the focus area, try to find someone with that experience.

Lenny (01:25:54):
I love that advice. We've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got actually seven questions for you, the most ever we've had for a lightning round. Are you ready?

Hila Qu (01:26:04):
I'm ready.

Lenny (01:26:06):
Okay. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Hila Qu (01:26:10):
This first one is called The Almanack Of Naval. Yeah, I don't know whether we read that one. I really love that one. That's kind of a life-changing book for me. I have it-

Lenny (01:26:22):
Do you have a favorite Naval-ism that comes to mind?

Hila Qu (01:26:26):
I learned finding leverage from him. He talked about there are four type of leverage. It can be your writing, it can be code, it can be capital, it can be team. So the reason why I invest a lot in writing is I felt like that's my leverage. And I love that.

(01:26:44):
The second book is called How Women Rise. I really love this one. I gifted this to a lot of my female team member and I really learned a lot from them.

(01:26:56):
And the third one is my book, it's called [Chinese 01:27:01]. It's only in Chinese, if you don't read Chinese you cannot read it. But I heard, my friends told me, if you are launching an email campaign, if you're doing experiments, have this book by the side, it will help with conversion rate just by its appearance.

Lenny (01:27:18):
That's amazing. Is there an English translation or is it only in Chinese right now?

Hila Qu (01:27:22):
It's only in Chinese, so you have to learn.

Lenny (01:27:25):
All right, I see. All right. There's an advantage there, if you can speak Chinese your email conversion will go up.

Hila Qu (01:27:29):
Yes.

Lenny (01:27:30):
And then just to the first book, it was called The Almanack Of Naval, right?

Hila Qu (01:27:34):
Okay.

Lenny (01:27:35):
Is that right?

Hila Qu (01:27:35):
Yes, yes.

Lenny (01:27:36):
Okay, cool. Sweet. And we'll link to all these. Okay, favorite recent movie or TV show?

Hila Qu (01:27:41):
I watched a movie, it's a sci-fi movie from China, it's called The Wandering Earth 2. It's by the famous author, Cixin Liu. He's the author of Three Bodies. I don't know whether you heard of it?

Lenny (01:27:53):
Mm-hm. Oh my God, love that.

Hila Qu (01:27:54):
That movie is awesome. It's kind of really cool. I really highly recommend it.

Lenny (01:28:00):
I have to go check that out. Oh my God. I heard they're bringing Three Body Problem to Apple TV or Netflix. There's like a show coming.

Hila Qu (01:28:06):
Yes, yes. I look forward to that as well. I watched many versions already kind of film, none of them are good. So-

Lenny (01:28:17):
That's the problem it's so hard to do well. Oh man, I'm not optimistic, but I'm excited anyway.

Hila Qu (01:28:21):
Yeah, yeah.

Lenny (01:28:22):
Favorite interview question that you like to ask.

Hila Qu (01:28:24):
When I interview a growth PM or analyst, I will always ask, "What is a experiment you launched that has a very unexpected result? And what did you do after that?"

Lenny (01:28:37):
What do you look for in an answer there that makes you feel like they are strong?

Hila Qu (01:28:41):
So first of all, they have to be launching a lot of experiments to get very unexpected answer. So if you are only... Many people remember their success for the interview, they prepare that very well. I don't want to ask, "What's your successful experiment?"

(01:28:58):
Secondly, I want to know just why it's unexpected. That reveals the deep, deep level of their thinking, how deep they are thinking. If they should expect that based on what they described, then they are not thinking deep enough, they are not understanding customer enough.

(01:29:15):
And what they do afterwards is also awesome. Like, "How do you face a failure or unexpected result? What are the clues you can pursue? What are the actions you can take? How do you learn something out of it?"

Lenny (01:29:28):
I love it. What's a favorite recent product you've recently discovered that you love?

Hila Qu (01:29:33):
I would say, similar to everyone, ChatGPT. But also Lululemon yoga pants.

Lenny (01:29:43):
Amazing. Great. What's something relatively minor you've changed in your product development process that has had a tremendous impact on a team's ability to execute?

Hila Qu (01:29:51):
Yeah. At first I added basically a section in the dock, in the ticket stack. Ask the PMs to write the success metric ahead of time. As well as adding which of the growth lever this is helping. Is this contributing to acquisition, activation, retention, monetization? And it forced them to sometimes think through deeply, "Why are we even doing this?" Sometimes they ended up not doing that by just writing it down.

Lenny (01:30:23):
I love that. Next question. I know you're big on children's books, do you have a favorite children's book?

Hila Qu (01:30:29):
My favorite children's book is called Someday, and I recommend everyone to check it out. And basically it's talking about how our children used to be our baby, become our kids, and when they are taller and more stronger than us and they will remember us.

Lenny (01:30:51):
I'm going to need to check that out now. And final question. I know you're big on growth concepts, you have all these frameworks and concepts. And so what is your favorite growth concept?

Hila Qu (01:31:02):
I would say north star metric, because I find it's not only valuable to growth, it's valuable to just everything.

(01:31:10):
When I think about what do I want to do with my career, does that fit my own personal north star metric? When I think about how I want to raise my kids, I think about what's the north star metric for successful education for my kid?

(01:31:27):
Because it forced me to think long term. It forced me to think about what's valuable to me, to them, not only by the society standards, ARR revenue, like salary. And also what's my vision for myself and for my kids.

Lenny (01:31:43):
I love that. It reminds me of a recent guest where she always asks, "What are you optimizing for?" Whether she's talking with her kids or her husband or her team, and it's a similar concept.

(01:31:54):
Hila, this was incredible. I think we've shared tens of thousands of dollars of value, and it will probably lead to millions of dollars of revenue for a lot of companies. And it's everything I hoped it would be. Thank you so much for being here and for sharing so much wisdom.

(01:32:08):
Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Hila Qu (01:32:15):
Yeah, they can find me on LinkedIn. Just search Hila Qu, H-I-L-A Q-U. You can find me. I have a personal website that's under development, but I contracted it to my kid, to my 12-year-old. So he need to wait until summer and hopefully this summer he can finish it.

(01:32:32):
Yeah, if you are a founder, you are looking for a growth advisor, feel free to hit me up. I'm always happy to just have a call with founders and leaders, get to know more people. And I'm a growth nerd, so I always want to nerd about growth anyway.

Lenny (01:32:51):
Amazing. Hila, again, thank you so much for being here.

Hila Qu (01:32:54):
Thank you.

Lenny (01:32:55):
Bye, everyone.

Hila Qu (01:32:56):
Bye.

Lenny (01:32:59):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
So you've built one of the largest and most respected data teams in all of tech.

Jessica Lachs (00:00:05):
For me, analytics is a business impact driving function and not purely a service function, not just answering the why, but answering the, "What do we do now that we know this?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:15):
One of your colleagues told me that you are incredibly good at defining metrics.

Jessica Lachs (00:00:19):
Retention is a terrible thing to goal on. It's almost impossible to drive in a meaningful way in a short term. Ultimately, you want to find a short-term metric you can measure that drives a long-term output.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:32):
You mentioned the early team. I felt extreme ownership.

Jessica Lachs (00:00:34):
Yes, you are a data scientist, but your goal is to figure out what's happening. And if that means that you're going to pick up the phone and call customers, then that is what you're going to do to roll up your sleeves.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:48):
Today my guest is Jessica Lachs. Jessica is Vice President of Analytics and Data Science at DoorDash, which has built one of the biggest and most impactful data teams in tech. She's been at DoorDash for over 10 years and was the first GM at DoorDash responsible for launching new markets. Previously, Jessica founded GiftSimple, a social gifting startup and began her career in investment banking at Lehman Brothers.

(00:01:11):
In our conversation, we go deep on how to build and scale your data org, including why a centralized org model is so effective. What to look for when hiring data people, how to pick the right metrics for teams to align incentives and drive the right sorts of outcomes. Examples of how the data team at DoorDash has helped the business make better decisions, a bunch of great stories about the early days of DoorDash and a ton more. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and helps the podcast tremendously.

(00:01:44):
With that, I bring you Jessica Lachs. Jessica, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Jessica Lachs (00:01:55):
Thank you so much for having me. I'm very excited to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:58):
So you've built one of the largest and most respected data teams in all of tech. I've heard from a number of people that look to you for advice when they're trying to build and scale their data teams. And then DoorDash in particular is an incredibly complex business. There's three or maybe even four sites to the marketplace. There's this operational element. From the outside, it just feels extremely complicated and wild. I imagine from the inside it's even more wild. Let's talk about some of the things you've learned about building and scaling the team. You have a fairly contrarian perspective on how to structure data teams. This was referenced when we had Elizabeth Stone on the podcast too. She approaches data the same way. So I'd love to hear just your take on how to structure data teams within companies.

(00:02:42):
 This episode is brought to you by Webflow. We're all friends here, so let's be real for a second. We all know that your website shouldn't be a static asset. It should be a dynamic part of your strategy that drives conversions. That's business 101. But here's a number for you. 54% of leaders say web updates take too long. That's over half of you listening right now. That's where Webflow comes in. Their visual-first platform allows you to build, launch, and optimize webpages fast. That means you can set ambitious business goals and your site can rise to the challenge. Learn how teams like Dropbox, IDEO, and Orangetheory trust Webflow to achieve their most ambitious goals today at webflow.com.

(00:03:30):
This episode is brought to you by Anvil. Their document SDK helps product teams build and launch software for documents fast. Companies like Carta and Vouch Insurance use Anvil to accelerate the development of their document workflows. Getting to market fast is a top priority for product teams, and the last thing that you or your developers want is to build document workflows from scratch. It's time-consuming, expensive, and distracts from core work. You could stitch together multiple tools and manage those integrations or you can use an all-in-one document SDK.

(00:04:04):
Most product managers will tell you, "Paperwork sucks." Anvil's document SDK helps teams get to market fast, incorporate your brand's style, and give you back time to focus on your company's core differentiated features. For your users paperwork often starts with an AI-powered web form styled and embedded in your application. From there, you can route data to your backend systems and to the correct fields in your PDFs via API. Complete the process with a white labeled e-signature. The best part about Anvil is the level of customization their SDK provides. Non-technical folks love Anvil's drag-and-drop builder and developers love their flexible APIs and easy-to-understand documentation.

(00:04:46):
Build documents software fast with Anvil, that's useanvil.com/Lenny to learn more or start a free trial. That's useanvil.com/Lenny.

Jessica Lachs (00:04:59):
There's two main things that I think are important when you're structuring a team. The first is I believe that analytics should have a seat at the table just like engineering and product and the business folks, the operators. For me, analytics is a business impact driving function and not purely a service function. I think there are analytics teams at other companies where they are answering people's questions, maybe even through Jira tickets, we're building dashboards. That was never really of interest to me. That wasn't the team that I wanted to build.

(00:05:35):
For me, it's about finding opportunities, about having a point of view on the decisions that we should make, not just answering the why but answering the so what. "So what do we do now that we know this?" And so that's definitely one thing as far as my point of view on building a data team. I think the second thing which may be a little more contrarian is I think there are people out there who think that analytics should be embedded into business units. I strongly disagree. I believe a central model, a center of excellence is superior and I'm happy to talk about why, but that's something that I feel quite strongly about. We've tried it or I shouldn't... well, we've experimented in the past with the alternative, so putting it into a business unit and it's just much more problematic and I think the value you get from a central model is far greater than some of the things that you might lose.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:36):
Yeah, let's definitely talk about it. And just to make sure people understand, when you say central versus embedded, is that in terms of reporting lines, in terms of their goals?

Jessica Lachs (00:06:44):
It's a great question. So mostly it's in terms of reporting lines because I think on the goal side, that is something where we have the same goals that our partner teams have, and I think that that's actually an important part of a successful central model. So when I say central model, it just means that for marketing analytics, marketing analytics is part of the broader analytics team. It does not sit and report in through marketing. Just to clarify.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:13):
Got it. So the reporting functions at some companies, there's the head of marketing or some partners to the head of marketing where the data, say, analyst or biz ops people or data scientists would report potentially to them and that's it. And they're not as connected to the core, to the rest of the data team, the rest of the analytics team versus-

Jessica Lachs (00:07:30):
Exactly. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:31):
Yeah.

Jessica Lachs (00:07:31):
So you'd have a bunch of smaller, of course, data teams that sit embedded within the functions. And I understand why business leaders like that. You're embedded within the function, so you're a part of the team. That ownership, that camaraderie that comes with that, I think you can solve for that. But I do understand that that is a benefit. I think the other benefit of course is the business leaders control the roadmaps so they get to dictate the work. They know that they have help and resources in that area when they need them. So that certainty, that control, I totally understand the value there, but I think that those are two things that you can solve for if you know that those are the biggest issues with a central team. So for us, we have a central analytics team, but we are divided up into pods that map perfectly with how product engineering, operations marketing are structured as well.

(00:08:33):
And so our team de facto has these folks embedded with our partner teams, even though the reporting structure is up through a central org through me. And that helps the team to feel like they are one team, both in terms of the analytics team feeling like it's one team, but also to use the marketing example, the marketing folks are one team and because the analytics shares the same goals as the marketing leaders, your incentives are aligned to work on the most important things and your success is their success and vice versa. So I think that that's been really a happy medium, but still preserves all the benefits of a central org. And there are a lot of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:23):
I want to hear about them, but I think something that some people may think when you say essential org is like a silo data team that sits there and they're like a service org a little bit within the company. It's like, "Hey, I need some data help." And you try to convince that, "Hey, I need some help on this thing." And that's not what you're saying.

Jessica Lachs (00:09:41):
Oh, no. No, no, no. That job seems terrible. I don't want that job. No, to the earlier point, we have a seat at the table. We are business partners, we are thought partners with our product counterparts, with our engineering counterparts, with our ops counterparts, and we again, share the same goals and have the same initiatives that they do. And it's just our job to come at it from a data-driven place. We bring to the table insights on things that we've noticed, deep dives that we do to understand the problems that we're trying to solve better. If we need to grow, what are the most efficient ways to grow? What are the trade-offs that we have to make? Where are their pockets of opportunity? That is what I expect my team to be able to bring to that table, the proverbial table, that we want to see that. And in order to earn their spot, that's the deal. We get the seat at the table and we need to earn it by bringing opportunities that we all can go and go after.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:52):
Awesome. So in a sense, it is embedded. They're embedded in cross-functional teams across the org, but they report up to essential org to you essentially in the end?

Jessica Lachs (00:11:01):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:02):
Cool. What are some of the benefits of this approach?

Jessica Lachs (00:11:05):
Oh, there's so many. Okay, so the first thing is a consistent and high talent bar. I think this is something I saw when we would have some pockets of analytics folks embedded is having a consistent bar for talent in terms of what we're looking for, what are the technical skills, what are the soft skills? And being able to evaluate candidates with that same bar, using our same rubric. You just get more consistent and higher talent in my opinion. I think that's number one. Number two is actually growth opportunities. So if you're siloed, you may be the most senior data person within... I keep picking on marketing. But you might be the most senior data scientist within marketing. Where do you go from there? I think when you have the central org, you're able to see if there are growth opportunities in other areas within the company.

(00:12:04):
And so that really helps folks to stay engaged because they can look at new problems if the problems they've been working on for several years are getting maybe boring and they want something new, there's an opportunity, move from marketing over to merchant analytics. And then I think similarly, if there isn't a promotion or room to grow, if you want to be a people manager and there just isn't a people management role within your functional area, well, you've got 10 other ones to look at and maybe there is that opportunity. So I think it helps with the growth opportunities for the team, which helps to retain talent. So that's a second thing. The third thing is just consistency of methodologies and metrics. So you don't have sales that was as defined by one team and sales as defined by another team. You just have sales and everybody is using the same metrics, the same methodologies, and you're able to improve your methodologies with input from more people.

(00:13:10):
And rather than recreating the wheel, building the same churn prediction model on six different teams. You can instead build one and have the input of six different teams. I think that's definitely another benefit. Also helps you just scale because you start to see the same problems across teams and so you're like, "Ooh, this is an issue that we need to get ahead of. This is something we need to automate," or, "This is something that we need to improve upon," or, "a problem that is going to grow as our business, as our teams scales." So I think it helps you see around corners a little bit more.

(00:13:45):
And then just lastly, there's a team culture brand. I think that's really important, not just externally for recruiting top talent, but the team is really proud to be members of the analytics team. We have a unique culture of learning, of sharing. You have someone you can go to talk about your challenges. You have someone who can peer review your work. I think just having that team culture that we have is really important. And it's a lot harder to get when you have the individual silos, particularly in an earlier stage when it's a smaller team, you just don't have as many people around. Everybody wants to have friends at work and we're creating an environment where they can find like-minded data nerds.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:33):
It makes me think about Airbnb's first data team. I don't know if you know Riley Newman well, but he built Airbnb's first data team and it was actually an analytics team. They called themselves the 'A-Team' on the point of culture, and that always felt a lot of fun and they loved being part of that team.

Jessica Lachs (00:14:49):
Yeah. We have the same, but now I feel a lot less special for coming up with that name.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:55):
Oh, you called it A-Team also?

Jessica Lachs (00:14:56):
Yeah, we got the A-Team, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:59):
And then I think they moved away from it when there was a push. Now we're data scientists, we're not analytics or analysts. And that was like, I don't know, 10 year ago, like [inaudible 00:15:08] data science. We're data scientists.

Jessica Lachs (00:15:09):
We'll always be the A-Team.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:11):
There's so many threads I want to follow here, one that's a tangent, but something that I think a lot of people struggle with is you talked about how you want your data team, your analytics team to be proactive, to find opportunities, to give you ideas, to help you figure out what to build, not just answer questions. At the same time, there are many questions that teams need to get answered. Do you have any advice for just how to set up a team where they both find time to explore, dig, show opportunities and come up with big ideas and also, "Hey, we just need to figure out the funnel conversion on this thing," or "Hey, what do you think? What's happening in China right now?" Thoughts there?

Jessica Lachs (00:15:47):
Yeah, such a good question. I think it's something that never gets easier. You have to be very intentional to carve out time for exploratory work for deep dives because as you mentioned, there are always more questions and more work to be done than hours in the day. And so I think being intentional about it and setting goals for your team around finding these insights through self-directed work is an important mechanism for holding ourselves accountable to that goal because it tends to be the first thing that goes when you get a lot of inbounds, you're like, "All right, well, let's deep dive on something that I don't know if it's really something. It could be high ROI, it could be low ROI, I don't know." So the expected value is lower than this known thing that I can deliver and make someone happy.

(00:16:42):
So I think to prevent that time from just slipping away, you really have to be intentional. We would do hackathons for our team to carve out days to just go and look into these really interesting things and find opportunities. And I think we have the support of our business partners because so many great insights have come from these deep dives and it really has been some of the work that drives future roadmaps. So they're always really great at allowing us to have this time and actually encourage us often to have this time for some self-directed work, to go find the next big opportunity.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:23):
If there's no answer that comes to mind, that's totally cool. But is there an example of one of these insights that someone on the data team came up with that led to something big for DoorDash that you're able to share?

Jessica Lachs (00:17:35):
So one interesting example was from a hackathon we did a couple of years ago where we were looking at referral as a channel for consumer acquisition. And when you compare that channel to others, it was below average in terms of the engagement you'd see from consumers who came through that channel and the payback period. And rather than just lowering spend on referrals and moving right along, we really wanted to understand what was happening. And so during the hackathon, we did a deep dive into referral. We actually tried referring each other. We tried committing referral fraud, creating new accounts to get around rules. And we uncovered a lot of fraudulent behavior through this deep dive. We ordered so many cupcakes to the office. I remember using referral credits because you had to place an order to be able to get the referral bonus. So we would create the account, place the orders, and we just kept ordering cupcakes.

(00:18:39):
And what we noticed was that referral as a channel was a bit misleading when you would look at the average in terms of payback and that it was really a bimodal distribution and you had one group of really great consumers who were referring other really great consumers, and the payback on those consumers was really strong. In fact, if that's all you saw, you would spend a lot more on that channel.

(00:19:08):
And then what was happening was you had this other group of consumers that were not as good people who were posting referral codes online and getting people who were just in it to get free discounts and credits. And we had at that point in time, pretty lax fraud rules. And we didn't have caps on these things. All of which came about from this deep dive where we found that this group of consumers was really a drag on the efficiency of this marketing channel. And so I think that's an example of a few things that we like to do at DoorDash. One being these deep dives and taking the time to really understand the problem and then ultimately make a bunch of recommendations for what we should do, including better fraud checks, caps on referrals, et cetera, et cetera. But also how the average can be incredibly misleading. And so looking at distributions and trying to break down what you're seeing to find ways that you can optimize in ways that you can gain in efficiencies.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:21):
That's an awesome story, great memory to come up with that one. So this is a really good example of a way to carve out time for the data team to think long-term, think look for opportunities, find big ideas. So the hackathon is one idea. Imagine many data people are struggling often to push back on asks that are just like, "h, we need to know. We just need this one thing. Here's a question, just answer this one question part." Do you have any advice to data to get better at pushing back? Sounds like a bit of cultural like, "We have time, we need to work on these bigger things." But just any advice for data leaders or data ICs to find time for these sorts of things?

Jessica Lachs (00:20:59):
Yeah, saying no to someone is never fun. I think as a self-proclaimed people-pleaser, you don't want to say no, especially when it's something you can do and you know that you can very easily with maybe an hour's work, make someone happy. I think it's really important to establish a culture and for leadership to really establish the rules of working and that operating model so that some of the junior folks aren't forced to always have to say no. And I think one of the ways we do that is through our goaling. So because our goals are the same as our business partners, we're able to pretty easily say, "Hey, we've got a limited amount of time. These are our goals. What are the most important things that we are going to work on this week or this month in order for both of us to hit our goals?"

(00:21:49):
And so when something comes up to be able to say, "Hey, this data poll that you want me to do, is this more important than these other three things that I was going to be working on? Yes or no?" And I think sometimes people don't necessarily realize the trade-offs, and when you make them apparent and you put them front and center, they realize that, "Oh, actually, you know what? That asset's not important. That can wait." So I think that that's definitely something I would recommend, which is always share the trade-offs. Don't suffer in silence with, "How am I going to do all four of these things?" Bring it up and say, "Hey, this is what I was planning to do. If you want me to do this extra new thing, then one of these other things is going to have to drop.

(00:22:36):
I personally don't think that your ask is more important than these three things, but maybe there's new information, maybe there's context I don't have, so let's talk about it." Rather than just being like, "No, I won't do that." That's not a great approach either. I think having the conversation and constantly reevaluating your prioritization to make sure you're working on the most important things or your team is working on the most important things is really good hygiene to have with your business partner. So some teams do that through a weekly standup like, "Here's what we're going to do this week. Do we like this prioritization? Do we not?" Some folks do it less formally than that. I think you got to figure out what works for you. But to the earlier point, it's a conversation with your engineering partner, your product partner, your ops partner, you're all on the same team, you're all trying to achieve the same goals and you're all incentivized to have your analytics team working on the most impactful things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:32):
This advice is great for any role basically. And if I were to summarize it to a couple words, it's just prioritize and communicate what your priorities are and then align on the trade-offs of shifting your priorities.

Jessica Lachs (00:23:45):
Every once in a while you just throw one over and say, "You know what? This is quick. I'll do it." At least I do. I think sometimes just knock it out, build some goodwill. I think that that's also important. But usually it's not something you can do in five minutes and in that case it's that ruthless prioritization for sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:05):
And then there's also the side that you talked about of just show that you can provide value doing these things that are longer term, like prove your worth. "Hey, look at all these opportunities I found for our team over time, I should keep spending time on these other areas," versus the on fire stuff.

Jessica Lachs (00:24:18):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:19):
When you're hiring people for your team, I'm curious what you look for and you think is incredibly important that maybe other people aren't prioritizing as much. What do you focus on when you're hiring?

Jessica Lachs (00:24:31):
Yeah. So everybody needs to have a certain set of technical skills. I think that's a non-starter. We have a technical bar, we do a technical screen. So I think that's table stakes. There's some really unique characteristics that I've noticed when I look at some of the top talent that I've had on the team or have on the team. I think the first thing is just curiosity. You can't teach curiosity, or at least I haven't found a way to do it. If somebody else knows how, please let me know. Somebody who is just self-motivated to pull on the threads when they find them. So they don't just answer a question. They're like, "Hmm, this thing seems a little odd. I'm going to dig in and look. Even though I could say I'm done, I answered the question, I did the thing I was going to do." The person that has that curiosity, something seems off, something doesn't really make sense and goes and proactively looks into what that is. That is just so valuable. So I really look for that curiosity and that self-motivation to do it without being told.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:39):
How do you test for that? How do you do that in an interview and get a sense of if they're good at that?

Jessica Lachs (00:25:43):
One way you can do it through the questions you ask is have something that is not quite right within the case that you're presenting and see if people notice first and foremost. And even if they don't, if you point it out like, "Where do they go with that?" I think that that's something that you can test for. I think you can also ask for examples that for these folks typically will highlight this, they'll talk about, "I noticed this thing, and so we decided to investigate." So I think that there are ways that you can get that signal through the interview process, but it's really hard. I think testing for hard skills is a lot easier than testing for soft skills. And I think in some of the questions we ask, we'll ask a question with the idea that we're assessing something separate than what the question is necessarily asking. And I think that this is one example of where that really works.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:47):
You said that you give them a case. What does that look like? What is the actual approach to how you do this interview?

Jessica Lachs (00:26:52):
Our interview process has in the early stages a coding exercise. So we do our technical screen and a shortened version of a business case. So real world problem solving. Typically, it's something actually from DoorDash history, like a real problem that we had to see how people can problem solve on the fly. I think that that's an important skill to be able to have, which is, how do you take a problem, break it down, talk through it. A little bit like some of those consulting cases that you hear about, but something that's really rooted in real problems. And I think you can learn a lot from those types of cases where, yes, you get to see how people handle ambiguity and structured problem solving, but ultimately most people get something wrong. They make an assumption that's wrong because well, I would hope that the interviewer knows the business better than the interviewee.

(00:27:56):
And seeing how people react to being told they're wrong is a really important signal in my opinion. Seeing how people respond, how they're able to take new information and pivot, how they're able to make a decision. So that's another thing that I like to see in cases where, hey, you may not know the real right decision. You might say, "Hey, I could see it going one way, I could see it going the other way." But I always push people to say, "If you had to make a call right now, what would it be?" So are people able to have a point of view without full information because that's life. Sometimes you have to just pick a direction and make a decision even though you don't have perfect information. So I like to see some of these softer skills and how they manifest throughout a case interview, even if it's not specifically what I'm asking with the literal problem we're solving in the case.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:57):
Along these lines, but in a different direction. You don't actually have a deep data science data background before you got into this stuff. I know you had some art background, you had an art portfolio back in school, and I think a lot of people wouldn't imagine that for someone being head of analytics for a company like DoorDash. I don't exactly know the question, but I guess is there anything there that you think would be interesting for people to know or hear?

Jessica Lachs (00:29:24):
Yeah, it's funny. I joke that I have a job I'd never be hired for because I don't have a traditional data science background. And I know that Elizabeth Stone on her podcast with you talked a lot about her non-traditional background for a CTO. So hey, maybe there's something to it. But I became a data scientist out of necessity. I completely self-taught in terms of SQL and Python and I did it because there was a need at DoorDash for someone to help figure out what the right goals were, how we set those goals, how we were performing different markets early in the DoorDash story, so 10 years ago at this point. And I think I just gravitated towards that type of work and Tony recognized that superpower in me even though I don't have that formal training. So yeah, I'm a bit of an artist for fun, but I guess a data scientist in practice or for career.

(00:30:31):
But I think that that non-traditional background has been a great thing because I'm able to hire people who have the technical skills that I don't have, the folks with PhDs in statistics and the data scientists, machine learning and otherwise. I am able to hire those folks and yet keep them really focused on driving business impact because my background was on the finance side, and so I've always been a pragmatist. And for me, the purpose of our team is to drive business impact. And so the mix between the technical skills of the smarter people that I've hired, the smarter than myself, and my grounding in driving business impact has been a really great partnership.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:21):
That's quite an inspiring story for someone that is just starting out and doesn't necessarily have a lot of experience in data, but also just generally. I think this is a really cool example. You could be successful in a field that you don't have a ton of background in. I'm curious what you think it was in you that allowed you to succeed in this and get to where you are today. What do you think you did right or what is some habits or ways of thinking that you think helped you achieve that?

Jessica Lachs (00:31:52):
First off, I have imposter syndrome like everybody else. So it's not like I have this crazy sense of confidence of like, "Oh, I can do anything." I definitely have the same doubts that others have. I think part of it was probably not even realizing what I was doing. When you're at a startup and things are moving quickly and you see a problem, and I've always liked solving problems, so I was like, "All right, how do I solve this problem?" It was like, "Oh, well, I need access to the data. I don't have access to the data. All right, I'll ask an engineer to get me the data. Well, this isn't going to scale. I can't always bother an engineer, so how do I figure out how to get the data myself? Well, let's learn Python." So I think it happened organically and I don't think I realized at the time what I was even doing.

(00:32:41):
And then I think if you think about things from first principles about what you need right now in front of you to unblock yourself or solve a problem, and you just focus on that instead of thinking about a global org that you're trying to build. I think that that helps. So for me, it was always about solving the problem in front of me the best way I could. And if that meant I needed to hire an engineer to report into me through the finance org, then that was what we were going to do and nobody was going to tell me I couldn't do it. So I think it's a belief in yourself, and ultimately it's just my desire to solve problems and figure out what has to get done is, I think, ultimately how it came about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:30):
I love that so much. There's so many elements there that I think a lot of people can learn from. I feel like there's also this underlying current of you're just motivated for this to work. You wanted DoorDash to succeed, and you're just like, "I will do what I need to do to make this happen. I need to solve these problems. I'm not going to overthink. Do I have the skills necessarily to do these things [inaudible 00:33:48]?"

Jessica Lachs (00:33:48):
Yeah, I think I'm competitive. I think that's a trait that you find in a lot of early DoorDash folks and current DoorDash folks, to be honest, just wanting to win and being willing to do whatever you need to win. So roll up your sleeves, do something that's not your job. I think back to early days of taking out the garbage on Saturday nights because it needed to get done. I think that that was something that is ingrained in our culture from Tony Xu, from our founder and CEO, and I think that really resonated with me, and I feel like I've always operated that way as well. And I think that that helped me in my career to be able to do what I've done without really thinking about it too much.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:40):
Are there any other memories or stories of the early days of DoorDash that would be fun to share? Something that sticks with you of like, "Wow, I can't believe that's what it was like?"

Jessica Lachs (00:34:49):
Oh man, there's so many, including so many mistakes that we've made. But I think something that really stands out to me is before I moved to the analytics area, I was actually a GM. I was the first GM at DoorDash and I was in Boston in 2014 launching the city of Boston when nobody knew who we were. And we would wake up early in the morning, 5 A.M. and we would go out, it was the winter of 2014. We'd go out and we'd hand out promo codes consumers outside of the [inaudible 00:35:30] in Boston, and these promo cards would be attached to kind bars so people would take them. And the whole team, it was a small team, there were four of us, but the whole team would go out in the morning to do this. And I think back to our sales guy, shout out to Joey G. So Joe Graccio is our sales guy in Boston-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:47):
[inaudible 00:35:47] Joey G.

Jessica Lachs (00:35:51):
And he was gold on signing merchants on the platform.

(00:35:55):
That was how he was gold. His compensation was tied to that. And yet in the morning when we would go out, he was with us handing out promo codes because he was part of the team because he wanted to win. We wanted to grow the business. And I think that that is just a great example of the culture that Tony and the early employees and Stanley and Andy, other co-founders really instilled in all of us early in those days. So I think that that ownership, that extreme ownership of the outcome is definitely one of the things.

(00:36:32):
I think the other is just being very customer first. And I say customer, I mean consumers, dashers and merchants as all being our customers. And the first time I ever went to the office headquarters in Palo Alto, which at the time was in an animal hospital. The first time I went there, there was a huge site outage and the whole company, it was like 20 people at the time, the whole company jumped online to do customer support, to answer the phones, to make sure that folks were getting refunds for orders that weren't going through, make sure the orders that were out there were getting delivered, just dropped everything and hopped on to do support.

(00:37:15):
And I was brand new, didn't really know how to use the tools, and so it was like, "How can I be useful?" And so back in those days, we used to order dinner to the office using DoorDash. And so in order to preserve about three dashers who would've had to deliver food to us, I was like, "I'm going to go out, go out dashing, go get everyone pizza so that we could feed the masses doing credits and refunds and do what we had to to make sure that we were serving our customers well." And I think that night was one of the largest refunds as a percent of our bank account that we had ever given out. And I think Tony, there were two examples that he's talked about where we just gave a lot of money back to customers because it was the right thing to do because our service failed and we wanted to do right by them.

(00:38:06):
So I think that those are two stories that stick out in my mind and really highlight culturally what makes DoorDash unique and what I think has been a really important part of our success.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:20):
It reminds me of the story that Tony and all the early employees, and I imagine you did this just like, "We're dashers," it's like a rotation where you dash for a while. Is that part of the culture?

Jessica Lachs (00:38:32):
Yeah, so we have a program, a WeDash program, and Keith Yandell, who's our chief business officer, did your podcast last year and he talked about this. But four times a year all the employees go out and go dashing or do customer support, and it's part of our culture that I love. I actually go pair dashing, so I go together with one of my colleagues. We've done it for years now, and it's a fun thing that we do together four times a year. Actually, usually more than that. And it's important because you get to use the product, you build empathy with all the audiences. I think all of us order DoorDash a lot, so we've built empathy with consumers. But being able to go and understand what it's like to go out dashing and when you're in the restaurant going and talking with merchants and seeing the experience from their point of view, I think it's just incredibly important. And of course we find a lot of bugs like, "Hmm, this doesn't work the way it should, let me report this." So I think it's also just great for catching bugs in the product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:43):
This episode is brought to you by Attio, a radically new type of CRM. There's a world where your CRM is powerful, easily configured, and deeply intuitive. Attio makes that a reality. Attio is built specifically for the next era of companies. It syncs with your data sources, easily configures to their unique structures and works for any go-to-market motion from self-serve to sales led. Attio automatically enriches your contacts, syncs your e-mail and calendar, gives you powerful reports and lets you quickly build Zapier style automations.

(00:40:17):
The next era of companies deserves more than an inflexible one-size-fits-all CRM. Join modal, replicate 11 labs and more, and scale your startup to the next level. Head to at attio.com/Lenny and you'll get 15% off your first year. That's attio.com/Lenny.

(00:40:39):
I want to come back to a thread, something you mentioned where you and a lot of the early team had felt extreme ownership over the company and that's why a lot of this stuff happened. For people, every founder, every product team, they're going to like, "Yes, we need that. Let's make sure everyone on the team feels extreme ownership." Is there anything that you think that the early team did to create that or is it hiring, just pick people that will have that feeling already, or is cultural?

Jessica Lachs (00:41:05):
I think it's both. It's definitely cultural. I think it comes from the top and I think that Tony exhibits this extreme ownership and looks for it in others. So I think that helps. But I think even today I expect of my team that same extreme ownership over the outcomes. And so I'm more interested in our team figuring out how to solve a problem than the box that someone fits in like, "I'm a data scientist and so I only do these things." Right? It's like, "No. I mean, yes, you are a data scientist, but your goal is to figure out what's happening, and if that means that you're going to pick up the phone and call customers, then that is what you're going to do." And I think that expecting that and setting that as the norm for the team, this ownership of the outcome is something that we continue to do at DoorDash and instill in everyone whether you were early or just joined last month.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:09):
Is there an example of that that comes to mind of someone practicing extreme ownership, like a data scientist calling someone or something along those lines?

Jessica Lachs (00:42:16):
Yeah, so I actually had a meeting yesterday morning with the team that's working on some of our affordability initiatives and we had shipped something that we expected to work, and it didn't. And instead of, "You can dig into the data," to understand the segments of consumers that you would expect it to work with and those that it wouldn't, of course we did that. But ultimately it was like, "I don't know why." And that's where qualitative research is superior to quantitative research, it's asking for the context, to actually talking to people to figure out what was the motivation, what worked, what didn't for them. And so the team, data scientists included, just sat and made phone calls. And so they were talking about what they found from those phone calls and that's going to inform future decisions. And I think rather than saying, "Well, that's what the qualitative research team is supposed to do," it's like, "No, no, no, that is what our team, anyone's team is supposed to do because that's what's needed to unblock us from this next test that we want to run because we need to know what we are testing."

(00:43:23):
So I think that it happens every day. I think I really love when I see team members go outside the traditional bounds of what a data science role might be and do some product management work, do some engineering work. I think that that's part of what keeps the job interesting. I think it's part of what makes our team special is that that is not only allowed, it's encouraged, and probably also a reason why we've had folks who've gone from my team to the product org and to the ops org and to the finance org is because they get to do and experience parts of that job and get a good sense for what that's like and then realize it's something that they love. So I think it's definitely something we encourage at DoorDash.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:17):
I love that. I want to move in a slightly different direction. One of your colleagues told me that you are incredibly good at defining metrics, which is so important to get right for a business, especially when it's complex at DoorDash. And I hear you're especially good at finding the right metric to drive the right incentive, especially when the business is really messy and things like that. So I'm just curious what you've learned about how to pick good metrics and align incentives well.

Jessica Lachs (00:44:45):
I've learned a lot of things about metrics, mostly from bad metrics. I actually think you learn a lot from picking the wrong metric. Ultimately, you want to find a short-term metric you can measure that drives a long-term output. So people always talk about, "Oh, we want to drive an improvement in retention." Retention is a terrible thing to goal on because it's almost impossible to drive in a meaningful way in the short term, and yet you want to be able to experiment and iterate quickly. So what are the things that drive retention? What are the inputs? So I think it's really important to find the right inputs, and then through experimentation test whether or not those short-term inputs are driving the long-term output that you're looking for. I think that's one thing. I think keeping things simple is another thing I've learned over the years, maybe it's data scientists, but they tend to love these composite metrics with a coefficient.

(00:45:44):
"We're going to wait this input at X and this input at X+2." And then you end up with a metric that nobody really understands that doesn't actually mean anything. And you're like, "I don't know if a 0.1 increase is it a lot? Is it good? Is it bad?" So they're just hard to work with.

(00:46:07):
And so I always encourage folks, just pick something simple, even if it's not perfect and your composite would be more perfect. If people understand it, if they have an intuition around it, if it's something that people can talk about across the company, it's going to be a much better metric in terms of driving real outcomes than your made up composite score that nobody understands. So I think keeping things simple is also really important. And then I think the last thing I'll say is it's important to understand how metrics across the company equate to one another.

(00:46:43):
And so we spend a lot of time quantifying things in terms of a common currency. So for example, if I were to lower price by a dollar, what would I get in terms of, we'll say, volume? Well, what if I lowered delivery times by a minute? What do I get for that in terms of volume? And so now you can make trade-offs between maybe your marketing team and your logistics team because you have this common currency that everyone can talk about. And so we've done that. We've tried to quantify all of the levers of our business, price, selection, quality in common terms, so that if we have, say, a dollar to spend, we know what we get depending on where we put it, over what timeframe. I think that that helps us make decisions more quickly because we know what our options are. We know we have our inventory of things that we can do, short-term, long-term, and what we get for it. So it definitely helps us to make decisions more quickly and hopefully better decisions.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:56):
These are so awesome. I definitely want to follow up on some of this. This is so good. So maybe on this last one, which we did at Airbnb also like, how does everything translate into Knight's book and booking? Every decision we make, what is the actual Knight's book impact? And so I imagine in your case, I don't know if you want to talk about these things. I imagine it's transactions, or purchases, or GMB or something like that, so I'm guessing is the final metric. I don't know. Is that something you talk about or you don't talk about that?

Jessica Lachs (00:48:26):
We measure things in terms of GOV, so Gross Order Value, and also volume.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:33):
Got it. [inaudible 00:48:34]. Okay, so basically every other metric that people are gold on as much as you can translate, there's a model that translates that into Gross Order Value and volume? Awesome. So when a team is saying, "Hey, we're going to change the onboarding flow and impact conversion here." I don't know. I guess what are some examples of other metrics on teams that potentially translate into GOV and volume just to make it even more real?

Jessica Lachs (00:49:01):
Yeah. So everything from the example that you started with, which is an improvement in the login flow, how many more consumers are getting onto the app and ultimately placing orders. And so you can translate that to, of course, orders and GOV. But then something as interesting as selling a Thai restaurant in Sacramento, we're able to say, "What do we think that that gets us in terms of GOV from the consumer by selling that Thai restaurant?" So it's every area of the business, it's mobilizing more dashers on the road. What does that do to our quality metrics in terms of delivery times? How does that translate? So because of that, we're able to figure out if we want to spend the dollar or spend the time, the team's time, on improving conversion or spending more money in marketing or onboarding more dashers or signing more restaurants or adding more grocery stores. So we are able to look across the whole business and figure out what is the right mix of actions to take to achieve our goals.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:18):
I could see as you talk about this why this is so important in a marketplace, especially a multi-sided marketplace where there's always trade-off decisions between supply investment and demand growth and dasher growth. I don't even know, my brain would explode trying to think about all these things, so I get exactly why this is so important to business. Okay. And then in terms of the simple recommendation, I think when people hear like, "Yeah, keep it simple," they're like, "Yeah, yeah, we're going to keep it simple." What are some things that point to, "This is not simple," that tell you like, "No, this is way too complicated. You should try to simplify this metric even though it's not ideal. It's not the perfect metric, but it needs to be simpler."

Jessica Lachs (00:50:56):
Yeah. So we had a score for merchant health, which we tried experimenting with, which was a combination of factors that we had found would lead to a merchant being on the platform and getting an order. So we wanted to make sure that the merchant had active hours on the platform and had images and had a full menu that was accurate and robust. A number of different inputs. And we created a composite that weighted all of these different inputs. And then we were like, "What is our merchant health score?" And you were like, "It's 0.35. It's not 35%. So what is that, that 0.35? I don't know what it is." So instead of that, we said, "What are the most important factors in order... First, let's measure how many of the new merchants are getting an order within their first, say, seven days on the platform.

(00:51:57):
And then let's look at how many of our merchants are doing these things we know are important. So these inputs. So let's goal our team on getting merchant photo coverage up. Let's goal the team on making sure that we have open hours, accurate hours." So yes, someone might say it's simpler to have a composite metric, but it was so hard to understand what it was and how to move it that it became meaningless. And ultimately moving to something that was simpler to understand, even if it meant having three metrics instead of one, it ultimately was better for the team because folks knew what they were trying to move. And so yeah, maybe we missed number four, five and six on the list of things, but you got one through three and that's 95% of it anyway. So once we get success with that 95, then let's talk about figuring out the other 5%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:55):
It's so funny because this is exactly what we went through at Airbnb, we had, we call that a healthy host. I led the host quality team for a while and we came up with this healthy host metric that was six factors of a host, like the cancellation rate, the review rate, their response rate and things like that. And then we're just like, "Cool, let's move this, let make more hosts healthy." And then you end up like, "Okay, which one do we focus on?," And, "Oh, what about all these others?" And we ended up basically focusing on one at a time. And so let's just make that the goal for now and then rotate through the different biggest [inaudible 00:53:28] opportunities to move. [inaudible 00:53:30].

Jessica Lachs (00:53:30):
Exactly. I think in hindsight for the example you give, which of those six things are actually the most important? And if you're able to then quantify which one matters most, you work on that one first and you materially move that one and then you work on the next one. You want to move them all. But being able to prioritize and know what you're going to get for a 20% improvement in, say, your cancellation rate, that's where analytics I think can add a lot of value. Because yes, ultimately you'll get to all of them, but the way you do that and the time can have a meaningful impact on your growth. If you can target the most problematic things first and solve those, you get more bang for your buck and that compounds over time. And so doing the things that matter first and most quickly is a competitive advantage in my opinion.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:21):
The other thing we found along those same lines is rotating between different metrics is so not efficient because you get good at, "We're going to move this metric." And your team's like, "Cool, we totally understand this lever," like cancellation rate. We become really smart at cancellation rate and then three months later, you need to switch to response rate and they have to learn a whole new paradigm of how to think about it. And it's just super inefficient. So we found basically, just keep a team on the metric until there's no more opportunities and give another team one of these other metrics.

Jessica Lachs (00:54:50):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:52):
So many lessons. Okay. And the first thing you said on how to pick a good metric about this idea of short-term metrics that have long-term impact. How did you phrase that again?

Jessica Lachs (00:55:02):
Yeah, so we find proxy metrics for long-term outcomes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:05):
Awesome. And it's similar to the simple metric, and it all comes down to, again, just like the metric should be something probably, you can move, you can understand, that's close enough to this ideal, perfect metric, but isn't necessarily the entire ideal. Okay, awesome. Anything else along these lines of just picking metrics, working with metrics that you've learned that would be worth [inaudible 00:55:28]?

Jessica Lachs (00:55:27):
With metrics, we are often looking at the average, and I think we talked about this a little bit earlier, but making sure that you're looking at the edge cases and your fail states is also really important. And so we often will set goals actually and create metrics around those edge cases. So like the disaster deliveries, the ones that go terribly wrong. So we have this concept of Never Delivered, which is orders that are never delivered. We're really great at naming things at DoorDash, and they're very rare. And so if you were just looking at the average effect or the average consumer experience, it would never come up. If you were just measuring quality based on average values of delivery times and lateness [inaudible 00:56:18], these wouldn't show up because they are so rare, but they're terrible. They're terrible experiences for consumers. They lead to churn.

(00:56:27):
They're incredibly expensive because you're refunding an order or repurchasing food and having to send another dasher to deliver that repurchased food. So they're very expensive, they're costly from a consumer experience standpoint. And I think if you're not looking for these fail states, they are often missed. So I think when you're picking metrics, yes, you want to improve engagement and you want to improve conversion, and there's a lot of things that are averages overall that you want to move, but it's so important to find these edge cases in these fail states and actually set concrete goals around eliminating them because it can be really powerful.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:11):
So the tip here is actually make that a goal like, never deliver at some team, just keep cutting that down?

Jessica Lachs (00:57:17):
Exactly. So we have part of our quality analytics team and we have product engineering and ops on it as well. Their goal is to eradicate Never Delivered. And in order to do that, you have to understand why they happen. Sometimes it's human error, sometimes it's fraud. And then figure out ways that you can prevent them, that you can fix them while it's happening and ultimately just get rid of them from the system. And you're never going to completely get rid of them, but you can make a meaningful impact to make them even more rare than a fraction of a percent.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:00):
Yeah. And I feel like people may be hearing this and like, "Of course, why would you not focus on terrible work experiences?" But I think in most companies, they look at the big numbers, they look at the averages as you said like, "Oh, it almost never happens. Why do we even spend any time on this?" And your point is, you should actually spend time on these really terrible experiences, even if it's a tiny portion of your business. I guess maybe share why that's important. Is it just because that has trickle-down effects on the brand?

Jessica Lachs (00:58:27):
Yeah, I think it's a couple of things. So just because something doesn't happen frequently doesn't mean that it's not important. So the Never Delivered example is a great one in that this is leading directly to churn and it's also costing a lot of money far more than its frequency would suggest. And I think the fact of the matter is is when you have things that cause churn, you're losing all of that consumer's subsequent orders, and that is not necessarily observed. You're just seeing one bad experience, you're not seeing all of the lost orders because they're lost. And so I think that sometimes this is an area where the data doesn't show you the full picture. And being able to quantify the impact on engagement, on profitability, will make it stand out as something that really, that you would maybe miss if you weren't really looking for it.

(00:59:25):
And then I think the other thing is with something like login errors, sometimes you don't see it in the data because people can't even get into the data. If you're not able to log in, you're not making any purchases, you're not ordering, and so you may not see it in the data that you're looking at. And so that's also something that I think is important for data folks to think about, which is what data don't we have? What data might we be missing? Where might there be opportunities and things that we actually need to identify and fix that we may not see? Because in this case, with login failures, they're not able to log in. They're not in the denominator, and so we're missing out on them from the data set entirely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:15):
Just a couple of more questions. There's one that I skipped that I'm just going to come back to. It's completely out of nowhere, but I think it might be interesting is about a global data org. So you run a global data org, you have data scientists and analysts and biz ops people all over the world, not just the US. I'm curious just how is it different managing data people in different countries versus just the US? What's a big difference?

Jessica Lachs (01:00:37):
Everyone always asks about the differences. What I am surprised by is how similar things are, how similar people are, the data scientists themselves, but also consumers and dashers and couriers, as we call them at Volt. There's a lot more similarities than differences. I do think that when you built a business in the US and then you introduce new countries, having different currencies and different languages adds complexity that you weren't necessarily familiar with. I think similarly in EU countries versus non-EU countries in Europe, there's different regulation. So that adds a fun layer of complexity. So I do think that it adds complexity to the problem set, but ultimately so many of the problems are the same. It feels a little bit like going into a test having seen the answer key. And so for me, there are problems we've encountered at Volt through Volt analytics where I'm like, "Oh, we've had a similar problem.

(01:01:49):
I have an instinct for what the answer might be. Let's still test because there could be differences cultural or otherwise, but I feel like I know where we're going to end." And then sometimes there are problems where it's new for one reason or another, and it's exciting because you're like, "All right, let's see if things are different here." Let's see what ideas might work in a Volt country that don't work in a DoorDash country and vice versa. So I think I tend to focus more on what's the same, and then I'm pleasantly surprised when I find things that are different because that keeps you on your toes and keeps things interesting.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:31):
I'm going to take us to AI Corner. This is a segment we have in the podcast where I try to understand how people are using AI in their day-to-day and in their business. I'm curious if you've found some really interesting way of using AI ideally in... you can go in either one of these directions, and how you or your team work day-to-day using AI tools to make you more efficient, or integrating AI into your product, making DoorDash better.

Jessica Lachs (01:02:59):
Yeah, I think that there are opportunities in both. I think one of the things I'm really excited about is actually the former. So in helping to make the team more productive, we do something called Office Hours at DoorDash, the analytics team. And it's something that we started eight years ago, and it was a way to provide support for teams that at the time we just didn't have the bandwidth to support. So we would go, in the early days, we'd go sit in a room and we'd say, "Come on in and we'll help you with anything you need help with. We'll help teach you SQL. We'll help look at some of your work. We'll be a thought partner. You could just come learn what we're working on." Whatever it was. We would do two hours every week of Office Hours at different times to be friendly to different time zones.

(01:03:52):
And I think one of the things I'm excited about is being able to really empower some of the folks that are still coming to Office Hours for one thing or another to be able to use AI to help edit queries on their own for example, to be able to say, "Here's a query. I want to make this. Please adjust this to our grocery business so that I can see the GOV for grocery." And so working to build these tools that will help not just our team in terms of time saving, and also to be honest, folks are going to use it on our team, but really to be able to empower non-technical users to be able to do things on their own and not have to take up bandwidth for the analytics team.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:40):
So essentially it's a chatbot that anyone in the company can talk to you to get advice on how to write SQL queries, query data and things like that?

Jessica Lachs (01:04:47):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:49):
Is there a clever name for this chatbot per chance?

Jessica Lachs (01:04:51):
So it's not clever. It's called Ask Data AI, and that's named for our internal Slack channel that used to be the open Q&A for people to ask data. So it's not at all clever.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:51):
But it's clear.

Jessica Lachs (01:05:07):
But again, it goes with the theme of very, very specific naming conventions that we have at DoorDash; Never Delivered and Ask Data AI.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:18):
I love it. Just clarity above all else. That's something I've learned from an editor that I work with. Jess, is there anything else that you want to share or leave listeners with? For folks that are trying to build their data teams, make their data teams more efficient, is there any final wisdom nugget you'd want to share?

Jessica Lachs (01:05:39):
I think the only thing that I want to reiterate is that you don't necessarily need a formal training in whatever it is you're building. And I think that also goes towards the folks that you hire onto the team. And so I mentioned earlier that we've had a lot of folks go to product or go to ops from the team. What I didn't mention is how many folks we've actually had join the analytics team from partner teams. So whether that was from engineering or from our ops team or marketing or finance, we are a net importer of talent as opposed to a net exporter of talent. And I think that that's because my own experience coming over from operations, from being a GM and making that transition into analytics, I find that I'm drawn to other folks who want to make a similar transition.

(01:06:39):
Now again, you have to have the technical skills, and most of these folks have acquired these skills on the job, whatever job they are doing at DoorDash before they transition to the analytics team, or they had maybe some formal training in school. But I love seeing the folks that make that transition and actually want to join the analytics team, even if they're not a career or data scientist. I think it creates a really unique environment where you have folks on the team from different backgrounds with different expertise who can teach each other things. So I can teach you how to build a discounted cash flow model in Excel, and I can learn how to make kick-ass slides from someone who has a background in consulting. And I can learn about common gotchas in statistics from someone who comes to us with a Master's or a PhD in statistics, and we've got our econometrics folks and we've got our economists. We just have a group of people with different backgrounds who can all teach each other how to be better. And we're not all carbon copies of each other.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:55):
What I'm hearing is you try to optimize almost for a lot of different complementary skills and very different backgrounds almost.

Jessica Lachs (01:08:02):
Exactly. And also people who have experience at different size companies. I think I love folks from startups who have that hustle and grit, but I also love folks who've seen what scale looks like and can help us see around corners as far as what problems we will encounter as the business is growing. And I think it is not just about a diversity of skill and a diversity of background, it's also diversity of prior company and stage. That can be really a unique way to think about structuring your team so that you get the best of both worlds.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:40):
Amazing. Well, just when you thought we were done, we reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Jessica Lachs (01:08:47):
I am. Let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:48):
Let's do it. Okay. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Jessica Lachs (01:08:55):
I tend to read fiction, particularly historical fiction, and I love spy novels. So I think my brain is always in problem-solving mode even when reading. A recent book that I read that I enjoyed was The Rose Code by Kate Quinn, and it's about women code breakers in World War II, and I really enjoyed that. But rather than recommending a book... I guess I did just recommend a book, but rather than recommending another book, I am going to recommend the Libby app and supporting your local public library because I love the library and I love Libby, so I'll give that as my other recommendation.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:37):
Beautiful. Very on brand with sharing economy, company stuff. Libby. Cool. Okay, next question. Favorite recent movie or TV show?

Jessica Lachs (01:09:46):
Yeah, another one. I don't actually watch a lot of TV, definitely don't watch a lot of movies. In fact, haven't seen some of the movie greats. I get yelled at a lot by my friend. "I can't believe you haven't seen that." I tend to re-watch things, so series from the past, over and over again. I think it's just like how I shut my brain off. So I've recently re-watched The West Wing, which is one of my favorite shows of all time, probably for the 50th time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:15):
Oh my God.

Jessica Lachs (01:10:16):
And Alias, which was a Jennifer Garner series from the early 2000s. Also, Spy. So I'm noticing a theme. I think I really love the spy genre. But yeah, I've watched those. They're both great, but not at all current.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:33):
Perfect. Perfectly acceptable. Do you have a favorite product that you recently discovered that you really love?

Jessica Lachs (01:10:39):
This is a bit of a curveball. So Korean sunscreens. So I burn really easily, so I have to wear sunscreen and I love Korean sunscreens. I was introduced to them by a friend of mine, and they're just far superior to what we have in the US. So I highly recommend people give Korean sunscreens a try, particularly there's a Beauty of Joseon on branded sunscreen. It's just amazing and is delightful to wear, which is important when you have to wear it every day.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:09):
I've been trying to wear more sunscreen as I age, and so this is a really good tip. Was that a brand you recommended?

Jessica Lachs (01:11:15):
Yeah. So Beauty of Joseon is the brand.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:15):
Beauty of Joseon.

Jessica Lachs (01:11:18):
There's another brand, Isntree, which also has a great sunscreen. But I'll be honest, almost every Korean sunscreen I've tried is great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:28):
Okay. I'm Googling this as soon as we get off. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to and share and or share with family and friends even more [inaudible 01:11:39]?

Jessica Lachs (01:11:40):
I do. So there's a John Steinbeck quote, which I'm not big on quotes, but I like this one, which is that, "It's a common experience that a problem difficult at night is resolved in the morning after the committee of sleep has worked on it." I find that that's something I really live by. First off, I love sleep and I try to get as much of it as possible. But the other thing is that if I'm stuck on a problem or if I am writing a response to something like a tense issue or an emotional issue, often I find that if I put down my thoughts, go to sleep, check it in the morning, I end up with a better outcome. So all of a sudden you have a new perspective and clarity on a problem you were stuck on, or you realize that you weren't clear in the way you were communicating your thoughts because you were emotional about something and you're able to put together a much better response to an e-mail or to whatever problem you're handling. So sleep can solve lots of problems.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:46):
I love sleep as well. I'm always telling my wife, "Let's go to sleep." Like, "Okay, I'll be there soon." I love that advice. Okay, two more questions. Who's influenced you most in your career? Is there someone that comes to mind?

Jessica Lachs (01:13:00):
So I think two answers, a multi-part answer. So I think first my career has been in male-dominated industries and I've worked with just some incredible women who've really influenced me. When I was a banker, there were two senior bankers, Vanessa Roberts and Gina Tarone at Lehman Brothers where I worked. And they were just so incredible. They were just so good at their jobs and I found that really inspiring.

(01:13:29):
And then at DoorDash, Tia Sherringham, who is our GC, and Liz Jarvis-Shean, who leads comms, are just dominant in their fields. And I think that that's really empowering and have been big influences on me to just see strong, powerful women kicking ass and that helps me believe that I can do the same. So that's one answer.

(01:13:54):
And then the other answer, sort of cliche, but my parents. My mom was a statistician at the UN before she got married, and she actually chose to stay home and raise three children, so I'm the youngest. And when I was in, I think it was elementary school, decided to go back to school, switch careers and become a nurse. And so the fact that she embarked on this completely new career in her forties after 15 years as a stay-at-home mom and my father supported this. I think that that was really, really influential and was probably the first time I saw that you can do whatever you put your mind to, no matter your age, no matter your circumstances. So that was really influential and I don't think I've ever told her that. So hi, Mom.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:44):
Hi Mom. Thank you, mom.

Jessica Lachs (01:14:45):
Yeah, I think that was influential for my career. Definitely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:49):
That's a beautiful answer. Fun fact, I worked with Liz at Airbnb. Your person you just mentioned in the comms team.

Jessica Lachs (01:14:57):
[inaudible 01:14:57]. She is great.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:58):
She's amazing. Final question. So when you joined DoorDash, imagine it wasn't obvious that it was going to work. I imagine it was still like, "This was a crazy idea. Maybe it'll work, maybe not." Is there a moment you recall where you're like, "I think this is going to be a big success? I think this is actually going to work out?"

Jessica Lachs (01:15:14):
To be honest, I went into DoorDash because I wanted to learn for the experience. I thought it was interesting, problems with interesting people. I never thought too much about whether it would work. I of course wanted it to work and was very competitive and wanted to win. I think there's two moments that stand out. One was when the third party market share data showed that we had become the number one player after, I think we started at number four or five. And I think that that was really exciting to see the trajectory and to see us gain in category share. That was exciting. I probably didn't see it until months after it had happened because we don't spend a ton of time focusing on it, but I do remember somebody wanted to include the graph in some presentation, some sales material, and we're like, "Oh, we're number one. That's incredible. We used to be number five." So I'd say that that was one.

(01:16:17):
The other one that stands out was, the first talk I gave in a lot of these startup talks in the early days in Boston, and I'd asked the audience, "How many of you have used DoorDash?" And there'd be like three people who would raise their hand. And then it was a few years ago, maybe 2018, 2019, and I was giving a talk and I asked the audience, "How many of you have used DoorDash?" And almost everyone's hands went up. And that was actually pretty memorable for me because in my mind, we were still the small startup that no one had heard of where I had to over enunciate the D's in DoorDash. So people didn't think I worked for Jordash, the nineties' denim company. And so that was pretty meaningful to me when just so many people had used the product or were consumers of DoorDash. It was pretty exciting. And I still get excited. I saw DoorDash mentioned in a book recently that I was reading. It was like, "We're in the book." So those little things when you become part of the cultural lingo that I think are really, really special.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:33):
Well, I'm a very happy customer of DoorDash. I've never had a Never Deliver. It's always there, sometimes a little late. Usually it's perfect. Thank you for everything you do. Go team DoorDash.

(01:17:44):
Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to follow stuff that you do? I know you've been doing more writing on LinkedIn and things like that, so just help people understand where to find you and how can listeners be useful to you?

Jessica Lachs (01:17:55):
Yeah, so as you mentioned, to find me LinkedIn, I don't have a huge social presence, but I am on LinkedIn and I am currently writing a series of blog posts about my experience building a global analytics org at DoorDash. Some of the lessons I've learned over the last 10 years. So definitely check those out.

(01:18:16):
And as far as your second question of how listeners can be useful to me, I guess read the post on LinkedIn and I'd love to hear what people think, whether you agree with my point of view or not. That being said, be nice. I want honest feedback, but I want kindness as well. So yeah, just engage with the content and let me know what y'all think. I think I do have a broader ask, which is just to encourage folks listening to TruthSeek, something I take seriously at DoorDash. It's a company value. But there's a lot of misinformation out there and it's often up to us as individuals to figure out what's fact and what's fiction. So I have a plea for folks to do your best, to search for the truth and speak the truth, and I think we'll all be better off for it. And of course, use DoorDash.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:13):
Of course.

Jessica Lachs (01:19:14):
Yes, there are three things that listeners can do.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:18):
You're at DoorDash.com. That was awesome. I love that last point as well in addition, to use DoorDash. Jessica, thank you so much for being here.

Jessica Lachs (01:19:27):
Thank you for having me. It was a lot of fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:29):
Same for me. Bye, everyone.

(01:19:32):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Laura Schaffer (00:00:00):
... Like the dead of the night. And by that, I mean 7:00 PM or something on. I'm pretty sure it was a Friday. We just asked for forgiveness and put these questions into the silent flow and ran as Navy test with a small group. And I'm fully expecting, "Okay, this is going to hurt our numbers, but maybe it won't be so bad and I'm going to be prepared to advocate the power of this data that we're getting." And I was totally geared up thinking about written, started to write the framework for how I wanted to surface this. And we start to get the data for this thing. I'm not kidding, an improved conversion. There's no personalization, nothing past it, just the questions. An improved conversion by like 5%, just improved signups. And it was one of those like, "What? Okay, what is going on here?"

Lenny (00:00:50):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Laura Schaffer. The week we recorded this chat turned out to be Laura's first week in a new gig as head of growth for Amplitude taking over for a previous legendary guest, Elena Verna. Prior to Amplitude, Laura was VP of product and growth at a company called Rapid. Before that, she spent over seven years at Twilio as Head of Growth and PM lead of the growth platform and experimentation platform at Twilio. In our conversation, we dig into Laura's career growth framework and the importance of carving your own path versus waiting for one to be carved for you. We also get into a bunch of tactical and surprising advice around running experiments, making decisions on gut versus data, developing your growth strategy and how to sell your product to developers. Laura has a wealth of wisdom and I learned a lot from our conversation. With that, I bring you Laura Schaffer after a short word from our wonderful sponsors.

(00:01:55):
This episode is brought to you by public.com who want to tell you about their new treasury accounts, which earn a 4.8% yield on your cash. That is higher than a high yield savings account, while still being backed by the full faith and credit of the US government. Treasure yields are at a 15-year-high. But buying US treasuries is super complicated. If you go to a bank or navigate an ancient government website, or at least that was the case. Now you can move your cash and the US treasuries with the flexibility of a bank account. You can access your cash whenever you want, even before your treasury bills hit maturity. There are no hold periods, no settlement days. Just a safe place to park your cash and earn a reliable yield. Public will automatically reinvest your treasury bills at maturity so you don't have to do anything to continue growing your yield. And you can manage your treasuries alongside stocks, ETFs, crypto, and any alternative assets. Do all your investing in one place and earn 4.8% a higher yield than a high yield savings account only with a treasury count at public.com/lenny.

(00:03:02):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools. We're trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage. Eppo does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue You discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click through metrics and instead you turn north star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions and payments. An Eppo supports test on the front end, the back end e-mail marketing and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, get E-P-P-O.com and 10 x your experiment velocity.

(00:04:15):
Laura, welcome to the podcast.

Laura Schaffer (00:04:18):
Thanks, Lenny, it is so great to be here. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (00:04:21):
It's great to have you. So I asked Elena Elena, Elena, I'm not even sure how to pronounce her name, maybe. What is it?

Laura Schaffer (00:04:21):
Elena. You got it.

Lenny (00:04:27):
Elena. Okay. Okay. I think I've said it wrong all the time. All this time. Okay, Elena. So I asked Elena Ferna, who's a popular guest on this podcast who I should have on this podcast and you are the first person that immediately came to mind. And so I'm really excited that we're doing this and that you agreed to be on.

Laura Schaffer (00:04:42):
Well, she's the best and I'm really happy that she referred me because I'm just stoked to be here. So thanks for listening to her guidance.

Lenny (00:04:50):
Absolutely. And it's a cool time to be chatting. You're the newly minted head of growth at Amplitude and so congrats, first of all.

Laura Schaffer (00:04:57):
Thank you. Appreciate that. Yeah, this is my day two and a half here. So very [inaudible 00:05:04].

Lenny (00:05:06):
Wow, you're a veteran.

Laura Schaffer (00:05:06):
Yeah, right.

Lenny (00:05:06):
I love it. Some companies, there's a little percentage of that shows you how many people have joined before you and I wonder what that percentage already is [inaudible 00:05:12].

Laura Schaffer (00:05:12):
We had that in Twilio and I got pretty, pretty high up there after a while. We had a stack rank and a spreadsheet. Yeah, but it is funny. So wherever that thing exists in Amplitude, I am right fresh there at the very bottom.

Lenny (00:05:25):
So what was the number you got to Twilio? Any, do you remember?

Laura Schaffer (00:05:28):
Yeah, no, I was very proud to crack the top 50. That was my claim the same because as people left, you move up. Right?

Lenny (00:05:36):
Right. Yeah, it's bittersweet.

Laura Schaffer (00:05:39):
Well, yeah, right. On one hand it's like, "Ooh, very cool." And one of the OGs on the other hand, it's like, "Oh my gosh, this person's [inaudible 00:05:47]. Bummer." It's a shift, but I'm excited about it for sure.

Lenny (00:05:51):
So you have this new exciting role and I thought it'd be fun to start to chat about career growth and just how you think about career growth. I know you have a framework of how you think about your own career growth and clearly it's worked out, so I'm curious to hear about it and see how it could be helpful to folks that are listening. So yeah, can you just tell us about how you think about career growth?

Laura Schaffer (00:06:11):
Career growth is definitely not a straight lineup, but there's definitely some frameworks and methods that have worked really well for me. And I think to dive into it, it's first good to just talk about the one that I most typically see people use to try to grow their career and why that can be a little problematic, which is that I see most people try to work really hard the job that they have within the role that they have at a company. Do whatever you can to grow there, show your manager all these things. I see people keep spreadsheets, it wins. So it can come up with performance reviews. Maybe you try to get better advocating for yourself, maybe try to get peers to notice or your manager's peers. And that's all good. It's all stuff.

(00:06:52):
But the problem with it is that you're limited to what your manager's ability is to advocate for you, to promote you. And you're also limited by the explicit trajectory of your role at that company and where the there's room for that or not at the company. And then often that perception can sometimes be a little bit in contrast to what your perception is. And also other things that happen, your manager leaves and then you have to restart with someone else. So the method that I use tries to take that power back a little bit. And something that I learned really early on in my career, I was very lucky to learn by accident, was at a company called Bandwidth, which is my first real job. And Bandwidth is now a public company and they've done all kinds of crazy amazing things.

(00:07:38):
But I joined when it was just 50 people and I actually joined in sales and I was just hungry to make it succeed and grow and bright eyes and everything, first real job. But I realized after a few months of being in sales that I was often repeating the same thing over again, using the same thing to sell over and over again. And it's like, gosh, this isn't ideal for the customer because [inaudible 00:08:04] call me and ask these questions and get these answers and all this stuff. And it's not ideal for the company because they're paying commission on this every time. That's not going to be efficient for our growth. And because we were small, I was able to catch our GM and I was just like, "Hey, I've noticed this pattern where I'm repeating things over and over again and they're asking the same thing.

(00:08:29):
I think we should put that online. I think we should make that available so they can just see it and then buy it," because we had an online checkout process. And I was expecting him to be like, "Oh, well, I know it's important but for this [inaudible 00:08:46] another, we need to do it this way, and obviously you've thought all about it." And thinking, "Oh, I'm going to come in this new person, he's just going to help me understand what I'm missing here." There's a little bit of that that I was expecting. And he goes, "Wait a minute, tell me more about that. What do you mean?" And by the end of the conversation he was like, "Hey, why don't you go do that? Why don't you go build that experience? Why don't you put that stuff in a self-serve flow?"

(00:09:06):
And we called it e-commerce manager and it was like got a growth before this growth, this is like 2010. And that moved me into a totally new position. And the main learning that I had from that was, which really took life at Twilio and absolutely worked for me there and I'm happy to talk about that too. But the core that learning was, your executive team and executive teams at companies are often very sharp, but the nature of their day-to-day just does not link them with customers.

(00:09:34):
And that means that over time, especially as a company grows, they often lose access to some of the best insights and in the heartbeat of the people who they're providing value to in contrast to folks that are closer to the problem. And so that means that your superpower is in really pulling those insights in and bringing them to life, staying close to the customer. There's not a single leader or executive that isn't going to be stoked to hear about valuable customer insights that highlight problems they might not be seeing. And there's a lot of those. So especially when they align to North Star metrics, those ones are the powerful ones. That was the way that I grew my career at Phil and I'm happy to share that journey too.

Lenny (00:10:18):
Yeah, it'd actually be cool to hear maybe another example of that. But I think an interesting thing that comes up for me here is sometimes you may have an awesome idea and it may not immediately happen. It may not be like, yes or let's move on, that's right, immediately. And I think it's important to just recognize they're not going to follow all your ideas, but they're always looking for better ideas. And to your point, they may not have the information that will lead to an idea that you will have because you're on the ground dealing with real problems, day-to-day. So I think it's important to recognize you're not going to always get your way and that's normal.

Laura Schaffer (00:10:52):
Yeah, totally. And it's almost like building up your individual brand a little bit. And I think one of the most powerful and accessible ways is learning about your customers. There's always those people at companies who's like, "Oh, well, she just knows our customers or he just knows our customers, they just know our customers. They just know." And it's like, "Well, how?" "They just know. Let's ask that person. Let's get their feedback." And those people often have a good amount of brand recognition of powers within the company and they're often thought of when the company needs to do something new or different or if someone is hiring, maybe they're thinking about that person for a cross team thing.

(00:11:31):
So it's one of the ways that you can build that brand. And again, I think it's a sweet spot because it's something that is very valuable to everyone, all the way up to the most senior leaders, which we can talk about here in a minute. And so it's going to be valuable for you in a valuable tool no matter where you're at in your career. And that's not always an immediate payoff, but it often does give you a trajectory outside of just your role and just your manager. It gives you something a little bit broader.

Lenny (00:12:05):
So maybe a simple way of describing to mirror back what you're saying is carve your own path. Don't necessarily assume your managers will give you the path that makes most sense for you or even give you the biggest opportunity. Just propose, "Hey, I think this might be a better opportunity and I'd love to pursue it." I'd love to hear the Twilio example if that's generally-

Laura Schaffer (00:12:25):
Yeah. So when I joined Twilio, there was no growth team at all, not even a breath of it. I joined in product marketing and I was leading our product marketing for our messaging lines, but I followed the same guy that I just mentioned. I made it my own personal policy to like, hey, I'm going to do my job. And I'm going to do well, I'm going to keep notes of things I'm doing well and all that stuff because it's good, but I'm also going to get to know our customers. And I'm going to get to know our customers really well and I'm going to pay attention when I'm connecting with them, not just about the space I'm in, but just broadly what are some of the pain points and things they're articulating that are relevant to the business and what we're trying to get done.

(00:13:00):
And one of the things that came up was that users were struggling and folks were struggling to get started and use Twilio. And that contrasted so deeply to some of the things that our executive team was saying and had high conviction in our company had high conviction, which is that Twilio was so easy to use. In fact, it was top three things about Twilio that we were really trying to get out of their brand. Were so easy. Developers love us, they say we're so easy. And there were tweets coming all the time, developers saying like, "Oh my gosh, they got started in a couple of minutes." So there's all these things that made that compound and made that conviction stick. But as I was talking to customers, I was hearing a very different story and it made sense as we were penetrating new markets, adding more products, we were adding complexity and we were pulling in folks who were a little bit less motivated and those things contributed to people saying this is difficult.

(00:13:55):
And so at the time, this wasn't a 50 person in where I could just go to the floor and go to someone and be like, "Hey, there's this thing I heard about, I think we should do something." But there was another tactic that I could take, and I just started sharing a voice of the customer report. I started sharing my insights, started writing down and just sharing them. And it became with digest and eventually people were like, "Hey, can you share it with me? Can you share with me? Can you get on your list? Can share with me?" And this was in a few months of me joining, I was doing this. And then that turned into, "Hey, you should host a quarterly voice to the customer session or for all of product." And this was a request that was coming from some of the senior leaders at the company.

(00:14:33):
And when our Jeff Lawson is our CEO at the time heard about, he started attending too. So now in the session I started pulling in other people's insights too, because now they had a forum for this. I could do that and have people send that to me and I could compile it and all of these things. So then this established me as that person who knows about the customer even after short tenure. And then when came time to do annual planning that year, and I joined in 2014 at the end, so this is 2015, I pitched this idea, "Hey, we think that it's easy. It is not. Here's data that I have, the information that I have and I think that we need to start a growth team here and that needs to be a core focus." And I was able to bring in a really critical partner to that and other folks who could support that because I had built up some of that trust.

(00:15:28):
So by the time I was making that pitch, I had someone on Andre Crow who was the seventh hire at Twilio and got to number three on that spreadsheet or whatever who was really close to the CEO being like, "Yeah, we desperately need this." I'm seeing this. He led a website, he basically created the Twilio brand and he led all the website stuff and he is like, "Yeah, we definitely need this." So not only did I have that little bit of trust from the executive team, but I also had folks who were just trusted on their own advocating and supporting this that I was doing. And so it was approved just almost very easily. I put stuff together for it, but it was the meeting before the meeting had already been done by this other thing. So it helped me create the growth engineering, growth product team at Twilio.

Lenny (00:16:14):
I love just how proactive your advice is here. There's a lot of people that don't do well and then just like, "Oh, I never had the opportunity or I kept got looked over all this time." And I love that there's all this just like, here's things you can be doing to get in front of people to provide value, to just create opportunity for yourself. Any other advice along the lines of just like, here's the things you could do for yourself versus waiting for someone to come and give you opportunity?

Laura Schaffer (00:16:42):
Yeah, I think that's the most easily actual because to do all of our jobs, we need to know customers, we need to know about customer insights, product, we need to know. But then also customer facing teams, social, those want to crack into product. Your insights are extremely valuable. You're talking to customers every day more about their problems and their pain than a lot of other people do. And so that is by far and away to me the most powerful and accessible by anyone in any role in any space. But I'll also say that that broader concept of just, hey, there's things that, and things of value that you know that others can benefit from at your company and building your brand as someone that is supportive, smart, creative, able to solve problems, make sure that you're sharing that. And so maybe you're really freaking good at communicating with brevity.

(00:17:35):
I suck at that by the way. So more powered anyone that can do that, I'm actively working on it. So share that. Go to your general Slack channel or whatever and just be like, "Hey, just wrote some tips for how to do it, some ways that I am good at this." And those kinds of things can really go a long way towards people starting to view you as an SME and not just the space that you're in, but in broader areas. And that can always present open doors for you and other people are looking up to you and seeing you, someone who's strong in ways outside of just the role that you're in.

Lenny (00:18:07):
SME is a Subject Matter Expert, is that right?

Laura Schaffer (00:18:10):
Yes. Thank you for unpacking my acronyms. That's another thing that I am actively working on.

Lenny (00:18:16):
I got you. I'll be on the lookout.

Laura Schaffer (00:18:16):
Yes.

Lenny (00:18:19):
Maybe one last question along these lines is do you have any advice for framing the proposal, framing an opportunity to your manager, higher ups that you see has worked best broadly?

Laura Schaffer (00:18:34):
Yeah. Yeah. And one thing I want to say too is with this stuff, I don't think that it necessarily does counter to what your manager's doing. It's more supporting them. I've done this stuff and then it's helped my manager promote me. So it's not necessarily, "Oh, we'll do this if your manager's failing you." Or they are not the boarding you or they can't support you. It's more like do this because this is going to be an accelerator for yourself irrespective of your manager.

(00:18:55):
But then also it'll be an accelerator for your manager in supporting you because one of the things that comes into play a lot when managers figure out promotions and doing those things is they'll sit in a room, often calibrations and with a bunch of people, and it makes it a lot easier when those people have had some access or exposure or whatever to you in a positive light. So these things can all run with your manager and not against, but it's just another way of you taking back the ability to build that momentum instead of relying on all of that going through one single other person.

Lenny (00:19:33):
And what I like about your second example is you just did it. You just started doing that tenant report for the company. It wasn't like, "Hey, I have a proposal, here's what I think you should do. Should we do it?"

Laura Schaffer (00:19:42):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:19:42):
It's just like, yeah, just do it.

Laura Schaffer (00:19:44):
Yeah, ungate your knowledge I think is the buzzword that I'm hearing.

Lenny (00:19:52):
Mm. Never heard that.

Laura Schaffer (00:19:52):
I think that's an Elena, see how many times we can bring her up. But you can do that within your own company. Everybody is skilled at things that they aren't explicit to their role or their space. And I think that ungating that opens opportunities. And if you're not sure, then go to my favorite go-to, which is talk to customers, get insights. Those are incredibly valuable. So rarely do people share those when they find them. So be the person that does that.

Lenny (00:20:21):
Another area I want to chat about is experimentation and growth and data, which makes sense if strong perspectives is on being the new head of growth amplitude. So maybe we start with experimentation. You mentioned that there's a really interesting surprising result in an experiment you ran at Twilio that maybe changed your perspective on experimentation and what you think might work and not work.

Laura Schaffer (00:20:45):
A hundred percent. Yeah, I'm through a fortune of two mind-blowing experiments that really shifted the way that I think about growth. So one of them, one of my favorite ones happened very early on at Twilio. So after I created this growth team, one of the things that I saw as to me an issue was that under signup flow, we just asked people for a username and an e-mail, like a password, and that was it. And that's actually relatively common at the time. This is a while ago now, everybody is [inaudible 00:21:16]. But we didn't, and actually there was a lot of existing conviction around that. I was like, "Hey, we retarding developers. Developers, they just want to do, they just want to get their hands on things. Don't put anything in their way, it's going to be disastrous. We don't want any shenanigans here with these folks, let's just let them in the gates."

(00:21:33):
But to me this was a really big assumption to make and a very costly one. It's like, okay, if that's the case, we're not going to know anything about anyone. And we didn't know who was signing up, we didn't know what they wanted to do. And that hurt our ability to understand how people were performing from a quantitative perspective. We were a little bit lost with prioritization. There's a number of implications here, but it's obviously a very contentious space. So this is the very first thing that I did and the first experiment that I ran. I did some research to understand say, okay, what are the most important questions to answer? What would I do really, really need to know? And it was stuff like what language are you coding in, what's your use case? What product you want to use?

(00:22:14):
And then there's one around, are you developer at all or were you use something else? Because there is rumors that we're having, not just developers sign up, which is this whole other interesting story. And I think of these questions that would also potentially be things that our developers signing up would understand why we're asking that it would feel natural. But anyway, again, adding anything to the signup was very contentious, but I really just wanted to get a little bit of data on it. So I wanted to run a test. I didn't have a team, I didn't have an engineering team yet and none of that stuff had built out. It was just me, myself and I. But like I said, I had started to build a little bit of trust and [inaudible 00:22:50], Andre, who I mentioned earlier who, because he was early employee and he had access to everything, one of those people, and he also was supportive of this and had similar haunches.

(00:23:03):
And so like the dead of the night, and by that, I mean 7:00 PM or something, I'm pretty sure it was a Friday. We just asked for forgiveness and put these questions into the signup flow and ran as Navy test with a small group. And I'm fully expecting, "Okay, this is going to hurt our numbers, but maybe it won't be so bad and I'm going to be prepared to advocate the power of this data that we're getting." I was totally thinking with written... Started to write the framework for how I wanted to surface this. And we start to get the data for this thing. I'm not kidding, an improved conversion. There's no personalization, nothing past it, just the questions. It improved conversion by 5%, just improved signups. And it was one of those like, "What? Okay, what is going on here?" And I actually dug into it, and what I found from just talking to a few customers once through the flow, I'm just learning about [inaudible 00:24:00] about it.

(00:24:01):
It was actually for folks, it was comforting. When you think about it, when users are signing up for your product for the very first time, it's new. This is new, that means it's scary. They're expecting it to be difficult. They're anticipating that there's going to be friction and challenges and that they're not going to figure it out. Almost like looking for the bogeyman. And that's the headspace. It's often the headspace that any of us are in when we're doing something new for the first time like ooh, this could be very challenging. And so by putting in these questions it's like, what's your language? It's like, "Oh, I do. I code a JavaScript and I can select that." Well, that's something I'm uncomfortable with. That would make my journey easier. Like "Yeah, bingo. That's my use case. Okay, I'm in the right place here."

(00:24:51):
It was actually giving folks something comforting and challenging the notion that this was going to be difficult, just the questions because it was aligning to some of the things that they were organically thinking about, which is what if they don't support my language? Or can I even do this use case I want to do? And so it was just a really interesting, the takeaway for me for this, the really interest takeaway was the psyche of the user is so, so critical. That's just as important as understanding your product and the broader market you're applying to and all those things. Just the psyche of users, new people doing things for the first time in your user flow, understanding that is powerful. And the simple catchy thing I say is that ultimately the learning here is, bad friction is bad, and good friction is good. There's no such thing as it being simple. It's just all friction is bad, which is what I had assumed going into this.

Lenny (00:25:50):
I love that you were new to Twilio and you just year-load an experiment to production.

Laura Schaffer (00:25:55):
Year-load. Yeah.

Lenny (00:25:56):
That's a big move.

Laura Schaffer (00:25:58):
It ended up being very helpful for everyone. I shared the insights from it and all these things. I've shared the [inaudible 00:26:05].

Lenny (00:26:05):
And [inaudible 00:26:05] conversion.

Laura Schaffer (00:26:08):
But for sure, use such processes with caution for sure. Yeah.

Lenny (00:26:08):
I love it. It's amazing.

Laura Schaffer (00:26:15):
That the right way to do [inaudible 00:26:15] advocating for the engineers here is the right way to make any changes in production is through or with the approval of engineering, but it was the right move overall and definitely helped business, so yeah.

Lenny (00:26:33):
Yeah, I love it. No, that's great. I like that move. I think we need more of that probably. I want to dig into what you actually... So what is it you changed, you added how many questions and then what were the questions?

Laura Schaffer (00:26:37):
There was a question around what language are you coding in? And then as an option to that, it was like, "Oh, I'm actually not coding, I'm not a developer." So for us, it actually gave us two really, really interesting data points. One was how many developers versus people who are not coding or in our flow? And then what language of the coding, which was massively helpful not just for growth and onboarding, but our documentation team, dos team. Would that end up being a critical way for us to gauge trends over time and catch things before whatever reports would come out at the end of the year, what people are doing, you start to see it. And then also product. What product are you interested in using? That was very critical for knowing the basics of how to organize someone's onboarding. Are you doing SMS? You're doing voice? To 281 or whatever. And then use case in use cases, you're doing a appointment reminders or are you doing a autoresponder or are you doing anonymous communications for a dating app or something. Right? So those were the very first questions.

Lenny (00:27:39):
Wow, okay. So it was four dropdown questions and that increased conversion. I love these examples where friction and increased conversion... There's so few of them. You hear about this could work and it's rare. And so what did you take away? What's the pattern you took from this? There's the idea, it's good friction, but is there something that you're like, what is a sign of this is going to be good friction?

Laura Schaffer (00:28:02):
There's still alleviated a problem. They alleviated the problem they had where they're coming in and worried that it was going to be difficult or that they weren't going to be able to figure it out, they weren't going to be able to get their footing. And I'd say that that's not unique to Twilio. That's something that I think users experience at any front door, at any company, any signup beginning the signup loads, it's like, "Here we go, buckle up." Especially when it's in a work context and there might be extra pressure on you to succeed or for you to make as an accurate assessment. So I think that psyche of, "Okay, am I in the right place? Is it's going to do what I need it to do? Can I figure it out? Am I capable?" These are extremely common things for people to feel when they're signing up.

(00:28:48):
And so certainly, that I think can carry out to any place. I'd encourage absolutely everybody to be putting those experiences within their early onboarding, not just for you selfishly, so you can learn and segment them appropriately, but also so the user can feel more confident as they get going and like, "Hey, I'm in the right place. This is going to do what I needed to do." But I think that the carry over there is just the psyche of the user and just being so aware that it's not so cookie cutter as, "What is the problem my market experience is and what can my product do to help them?" There's also this other thing in the room which is so important to people's success, their ability to succeed with your products and your self-serve experiences, which is, what is the mentality and the psyche of the person at the various stages in your journey?

(00:29:37):
And if you're not incorporating that or addressing that, you will absolutely miss things or things will fail and you'll be very confused as to why. We had a great experiment that I'm happy to talk about where same concept, a totally different situation, which is later in onboarding. One of the things that we tried to do over time to make Twilio less complex was to offer steps like, [inaudible 00:30:08] onboarding, welcome step one, here's what you want to build. Great, we all know that now, "Okay, step one, go do this thing. Step two, go to this thing. Three, this thing. Four, this thing. Five, bam, you're live, congratulations, aha," all these things. So we shipped that, got that out there and I was like, yeah, it was improved conversion. It wasn't like that great. It's like, man. We went from there being absolutely nothing, "Choose you're adventure, figure it out, go figure it out. Good luck." To this prescriptive thing. And it wasn't converting [inaudible 00:30:37].

(00:30:38):
So to talk to some users and there wasn't anything particularly obvious that was coming out as to what the issue was. It was like, "Oh yeah, Let's go to step one." And we did mock the people. "Okay, now I know, I do step two." But there was one thing that I was hearing that was coming out that feels like something, and that was the telephone number, the telecom part. Developers when they were coming into Twilio, it was things that were familiar to them. APIs, the language they're coding in, code samples, documentation, things like the bogeyman, the things that would psychologically trip them up, telecom, phone numbers. These things that just were completely out of the zone of anything that they'd ever worked with before, especially earlier on in Twilio's journey.

(00:31:28):
But even now, right? Telecom's very different beast for most developers. And guess what was step one? Get a phone number because that's step one. Anytime that anyone's trying to teach one to use Twilio one-on-one, always going to sit down, ask and be like, "Okay, here we're going to go get a phone number and configure it." And that's what anyone every time will do. However, in a self-serve experience, when you don't have that safe person sitting next to you being like, "Don't worry, it's going to be okay, I'm going to take you through this crazy telecom journey." They're on their own, but that's psyche telling is them like, "Oh my god, telecom. Well, I can't do that. That sounds scary. We're getting a phone number configured. Whoa, I'm out of my debt."

(00:32:01):
And so what did we do to test this out? Test out whether that was the issue? Actually, and it's first we're in the MVP. They kicked them out of the portal entirely and put them into a docs page where we could manufacture an experience where the first thing they saw was code and they're in the docs safe place, the language that they're coding in and then snuck in there.

(00:32:26):
It was like, "Oh, get a phone number, let's go configure it." Not as step one, not as the leading thing, but embedded. And the analogy I have for this is pilling a hot dog. So if anyone's got a dog or an animal you have to feed a pill to, it's like you can't just feed the pill to the animal, it's never going to happen. But if you shove it inside of a hot dog, which looks good and that's exciting, then you can get them to consume it more easily. And so this was-

Lenny (00:32:53):
Yeah. We do peanut butter, that's [inaudible 00:32:55].

Laura Schaffer (00:32:55):
Yeah, exactly, right? Yeah, hot hotdog, peanut butter, all that. You bury it. You embed the scary unpleasant thing. And so that's what you said with the phone number stuff, that telecom stuff. And guess what? Even though we're a good amount of the console and they're going off and we had no easy return button, it converted better because we were addressing the big problem that was there at the time, which is their psyche. They were not ready to come in and immediately thrown into a phone number experience. That was letting the bogeyman and out to party and that's not what was going to work. We needed to put that bogeyman pill and the hotdog.

(00:33:31):
And so then once that validated, then we can actually go through the business of putting that into the onboarding float correctly and then that could be even better. But so again, the psyche of your user is such a critical thing to be thinking about. And if something very logical isn't converting well sometimes, it means that you're battling against the psyche of a user and you want to take a step back and think about and learn about where someone is psychologically in your space.

Lenny (00:33:59):
Feels like you had this experiment that was a complete redesign of the onboarding flow and that didn't work. And then your second attempt was a different approach that's like a full onboarding flow. And I'm curious, do you have a take on just when you run experiments? And it's something we dealt with a lot at Airbnb in other places is like, do you just redesign the whole thing or is it better to iteratively work from where you're today and just experiment piece by piece towards some future much better experience?

Laura Schaffer (00:34:26):
Here's what I would say to this is that from a high level, it's always going to be better to be iterative. And the reason that it's better is that roughly 80% of the times, ORs in the time are hypotheses and the things that we believe will be true [inaudible 00:34:42]. And this is amazing. There's an amazing article out there I'm happy to share with you so you can put in the show notes.

Lenny (00:34:48):
Yeah, absolutely.

Laura Schaffer (00:34:49):
That really takes a scientific approach to proving that out. Companies like Netflix and Microsoft, there's over and over again 80 plus percent. Some companies say 90% of things fail. And so the closer you get to something that you go bear your head in the sand or go into an attic and build something for six months and ship it, the more likely it is that you are going to ship the 80% wrong stuff.

(00:35:17):
Whereas the more iterative you are, the more likely that you're going to catch it sooner. And failure doesn't have to be a wall, it can be a compass, it can be the thing that leads you to the right thing. And so you always want to as best you can, get stuff in front of customers so that you can get that compass and get that compass activated, know where to go.

(00:35:40):
So that means doing ugly things. I tell my teams all the time, if it's not embarrassing, you've gone too far. Got to be embarrassing. The first thing, that was embarrassing, kicking people out, onboarding, spend all this money and whatever to get them into your center flow, and then the first thing we do, get out of here. That's nuts. But if it hadn't validated, that would've been a very cheap but very valuable learning. Instead, it was a very powerful cheap learning in the other direction. Okay, now we know we can invest in it. We know that's the right thing to do. So always better to be iterative so that you are letting failure work for you instead of having it be a trap that you fall into.

Lenny (00:36:22):
I know that you just shared as per experiment, you're probably wrong 80% of the time. In my experience, launching a halt redesign is as negative a hundred percent of the time. I've grown weary to avoid that as much as possible, which is like, you know that, you're taught that as you go into growth and product, but you're just like, "Nah, come on, let's just make it awesome. Just redesign this whole thing." Especially your designers is always like, "No, let's start again. Let's make it amazing." But it always ends up being negative and you're like, "Okay, well, it's too late now we got to launch this thing, we don't have time to start again."

Laura Schaffer (00:36:52):
Well, it's funny, in the articles, and you'll see it was written by somebody from Microsoft who built Implementation platform and did all these cool things, as he went into actually trying to apply a scientific method of figuring out how often people are wrong about their hypotheses and what they're planning to do. He's like, "I wonder if that applies to us here at Microsoft." Even for him, that question of [inaudible 00:37:16]. And I think it's challenging when there's a lot of smart people in this space doing things and it's very difficult to think, "Gosh, am I really wrong? 80 plus, 90% of the time?" But when you think about it, makes total sense because what has to happen for something to be successful? You have to understand the problem perfectly. You have to then understand who's having the problem perfectly, the customer. At what time they're having the problem.

(00:37:43):
Then you've got to put the right solution in front of them to solve that problem. Maybe you've got the problem, all that stuff, but your solution something off. Or maybe your solution is right, but maybe it's just not presented, it communicated in the right way. You could have any one of those things off and it's not going to succeed. It's not going to have the metric impact you're expecting it to have. So in that context, it's almost like incredible. We do succeed 20 to 10% of the time given everything that has to line up. And so I think it's one of those things where you really want to go into it embracing that, "Okay, this isn't about how smart I am or how good my team is or any of that stuff. It's just the logic of this is challenging to get it right and let's embrace that and let's lean into that knowledge and make it a part of our strategy," instead of finding against it.

Lenny (00:38:39):
Have you found anything that helps you increase those odds or is just, this is the way of the world and you probably can't significantly increase the chances your experiment works out?

Laura Schaffer (00:38:51):
So here's the thing, I think there's very little that we can do to make that space easier. All those things have to be figured out. And so I definitely think that everybody is going to be in a space where their original ideas, untested ideas are going to be around that hit rate. However, the way that you go about validating those can be totally different and you can be very fast about validating those ideas and that's the key. And AB testing is one of the most expensive kinds of ways to validate an experiment. It often requires design and engineering and the PM or growth person or marketing person who's crafting it. All these things are investments that take a lot of time even for simple thing. And then you have the time factor, how long's the thing I have to run to have an impact?

(00:39:47):
So all of that is extremely expensive. And so I think the key is to just think through, "Okay, what are the things I can do to quickly validate what these ideas are that we [inaudible 00:39:59]?" And you can do that with painted doors, which is where you test rate the concept and the idea before it exists versus the actual experience. You can do mocks. If you've got a designer, create those mocks for that experience, put it in front of people, see how they engage with it. That can be so powerful.

(00:40:16):
You could invalidate tons of hypotheses at that state. The only things you want to get to that deep AB testing environment or ones that have been vetted along the way. And that way, you reduce your fail rate, because you're failing faster by using other methods. So I think I more advocate for that side. Let's fail fast by using those tools rather than figuring out a way that you can rise above where everyone else is operating and figure out ways to solve all that complex stuff better because that's going to be challenging, but you can always get better at experimenting and validating things faster.

Lenny (00:40:59):
This episode is brought to you by Writer. How much hype have you been hearing about generative AI? So much. But how do you take it from a shiny toy to an actual business tool that helps you do your actual job? Writer is an enterprise grade generative AI platform built specifically for the needs of businesses and already widely deployed at world-class brands like Uber, Spotify, HubSpot, and UiPath. With writer, you can break through content bottlenecks across your organization from marketing webpages to sales e-mails in product messages to creating high quality on-brand content at scale.

(00:41:34):
And unlike other AI applications, writers' training happens securely on your data and your style and brand guidelines that you provide specific to your organization. The result is that you get consistent content in your brand voice at scale. Get AI that your people will love for a limited time. Listeners to Lenny's podcast and get 20% off if they go to writer.com/lenny, that's writer.com/lenny.

(00:41:59):
Where do you find the best ideas come from for driving meaningful lift? Is it gut instinct type and experience bucket or is it data telling you like, "Hey, or here's a huge opportunity," in your experience?

Laura Schaffer (00:42:15):
I'm a very data-driven person. I self-describe and think of myself that way. In large part because of that, I feel you have to be constantly checking yourself and data is a really great way to do that. But I definitely think that I would be described as someone who's going more by their gut when looking at date end results just because of the way that I approach it, which is I'm very comfortable and very common in using qualitative responses and things like that and supplement to quantitative data to make a decision and that puts less of a burden on the quantitative to really make an assessment of whether something was working or not.

(00:42:51):
One of the things I see, I think sometimes goes against what other folks do, although I'm seeing things shift a little, is that 95% confidence rate. My background in college, I was in a lab running experiments or really publishing two journal and stuff and we had to have that 95% confidence rate, had to because the things that were coming out of the lab and being published were influencing things like how we do education and how we understand how bias works and when it shows up and therefore how we can combat it.

(00:43:23):
Things were wrong. And sending a bunch of bologna, that can cause some significantly bad things like false positive, false negatives in that context can be very dangerous, for lack of a better word. And you think of other pharmaceuticals, the 95% confidence rate belongs in some companies and some industries because the risk of failure on the impact of a false success is very high.

(00:43:47):
But those of us converting users and trying to upsell folks, we are very fortunate to not have that level of burden on us and we can take advantage of that. And so there are definitely times where I will advocate for and I will push for and I will myself use lower confidence intervals and 95%, especially if that doubles amount of experiments that you can run in a year. End of the day, these are all methods that we use to try to validate the hypotheses that we have. And if you're doing a 95% confidence in a role, you're still accepting a 5%, some amount of false success, do that a little bit more, challenge you to do that a little bit more. And then run way more experience. If you look at the net of what your team is doing over the course of year, what you're doing over the course of a year, you will be positive.

Lenny (00:44:42):
Wow, that is a big idea. Idea of releasing the P-value confidence interval for experimentation and data teams. Everyone would be excited about this. Probably maybe not some data scientists on teams. Do you do that? How do you act? Is that how you operate on your teams? Just like we don't need 95% competence?

Laura Schaffer (00:45:03):
So I'll say this, this is actually very critically important. You must have this game plan set before you run something. Failure mode that I see so many teams fall into is they'll run the experiment or whatever it is and then they'll make the data fit the hypothesis. Or sometimes they'll go without a hypothesis and just be like, "This is going to do better things for our metrics," but not a core reason as to why or what exactly are we testing here. And so this is another area we could absolutely fall into that trap. "Let's [inaudible 00:45:36] on good 80. I think it's good. That Laura person said it was cool. So I think that that's fine." That will always be a trap. So it needs to be very deliberately thought of in advance as a way of like, "Hey, here's how we're going to validate this." And always, always, always, if you're going to accept more risk of a false success or false positive, false negative, you want to then be really thinking about how you're going to harden your validation of a hypothesis.

(00:46:03):
For example, let's take that when we talked about with Twilio where we are kicking people out and we're sending them to the pilling hotdog experiment, and we're sending people to that experience to hide the phone number. Now in that case, let's say that we were going to accept a lower confidence interval. I would very much want to see qualitative feedback to confirm that that hypothesis was true. I want to be looking at the qualitative data from the ones where people were thrown into the existing flow and one's put into the dogs that one of them felt more confident and more like this was really easy to get through and they felt out of a territory and things like that. And I'd be wanting to hear from the ones who were in the other one, things like, "Oh, I got stuck on that [inaudible 00:46:48]." Like, "Figure this out, but it feels like it's that amount of my depth."

(00:46:52):
I would want to be looking for other things to corroborate the hard data that I'm seeing. And yes, it opens the door to whenever you open the door to more risk acceptance, you are going to have some false successes there. But all of these things together can overall make it more likely that you're shipping more things that are going to positively influence the customer. And again, I can't say it enough. It is a huge risk in and of itself to not ship as much as you possibly could in a year. That is a huge risk given that very high fail rate. So to those data scientists, and I've chatted with a few of my time, what I try to explain is that that article, that data that the 80%, that's hard data about what a detriment it can be if you don't run an enough experiments.

(00:47:51):
If you just run 10 in a year on there, maybe two around impact, two of a course of an entire year if you take that approach. So data scientists can understand, "Hey, if we do this, if we run this down, we can double or triple whatever it is, the number of experiments where we can run and overall net that's going to result in more successes that will overall net us to a positive place." You can still tell a data story to the data scientist about why you're doing this. Again, this is why when you asked that question identify, as a very data-driven person. But I think some of the methods that I use can sound at the service level as more like, "Oh, I'm going by my gut." But again, very data driven is just embracing the reality of some of the hard data that I don't think we all embrace or are even aware of sometimes about that fail rate.

Lenny (00:48:42):
This is awesome. This is a big idea. Have you written about this anywhere for folks that maybe want to try this approach at their company? And if not, you should.

Laura Schaffer (00:48:50):
I appreciate that. It's funny, it's like all my general life to do is just start writing some of this down. I have three children, one of whom is five months old, and then I have two and four. And so sometimes I'll start to write and then one of them will crawl across the keyboard. And by one of them, I mean all of multiple times. But eventually, yeah, I'll be very happy to do that if folks would be interested. I'm always happy to do whatever I can to help folks, help empower folks with knowledge to do better because none of this is secret sauce really. It's just learn from experience and it's always better to learn from others' experience than your own. It's faster. So yeah, I would definitely [inaudible 00:49:35] is that, I think that's the best that I can say, but eventually my kids will get older. I hear this and maybe I can do so.

Lenny (00:49:42):
Hopefully. Cool. So maybe if you're watching us on YouTube, leave a comment and if you want Laura to write in depth about this idea and spread it to your company. Okay, I want to talk about growth, but I have one last question just along the lines of experimentation. Is there any other just, I don't know, big lessons or takeaways of running experiments that would be interesting to share?

Laura Schaffer (00:50:02):
I think we got into this one a little bit, but I just really want to exclamation point, underline it, which is that notion of making the data wrap to fit a concept. I think a lot of teams feel and are under a lot of pressure to show progress and, "What did you do this month? Where did the metrics move?" And it can cause folks to feel like they have to do that, where it's like, "Oh gosh, this experiment." Everyone's got the experience where you run an experiment and you're like looking at the data, refresh, refresh, refresh, oh my gosh, and actually perform worse. Or it's not the same and, "Gosh, we got everyone really excited about this thing that we all worked on really hard. Like, oh my god, what are we going to say in the QBR or the monthly report?" Whatever it is that the results come to light.

(00:50:55):
And to this, I'd say this, that it's incredibly important for growth teams to educate out and for folks outside of growth and leading growth, especially to understand that the best way for a growth team to succeed, the only way really for them to succeed is to embrace the fact that they're there to validate, to understand what the biggest opportunities are and to go after them.

(00:51:24):
And that is not something that can be done on a weekly timeline, sometimes even a monthly, depending on the space you're in and what's known and unknown. And so any growth team that's beholden to short timeline wins and improvement is always going to be dangerous. That's an environment that's conducive to vanity Metric usage and massaging the data [inaudible 00:51:47]. And ones that are more successful are ones that are reporting over longer periods of time. Because I think growth team, given enough time to fail, enough time to learn the right thing to do is absolutely going to show success, real success. Not that, "Okay, we're going to make this data fit." But real moving the metrics success.

(00:52:03):
And so definitely educating out. If you find yourself in a position where you are beholden to that, share that 80% fail rate. Just math, statistics, data. You cannot be successful in an environment, but over time you can be. And so that's one thing I definitely would draw on. I end up spending a decent amount of my pie chart at Twilio and then also at Rapid where I was after that and I'm sure I'll spend some time at Amplitude as well. Just helping folks understand what is the healthiest ecosystem, most powerful ecosystem for a growth team to operate in. And time and expectations over time is a big part of that.

Lenny (00:52:46):
When you say pie chart, it's like the pie chart of your time like a big chunk of your time goes to this?

Laura Schaffer (00:52:46):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:52:50):
That's awesome. I like that. I use white charts a lot as to describe that same idea. Just to be a little more concrete there, what is the timeframe you think is the minimum for a growth team to be thinking across?

Laura Schaffer (00:53:01):
I think it's good, especially for newer teams, but even teams in general. Commit to something that you can do over the course of a year and low, medium, high is always helpful in that space. A lot times-

Lenny (00:53:01):
What do you mean by that, by low, medium, high?

Laura Schaffer (00:53:17):
Low, medium high, more like, "Hey we've got a few bets that we have or few core hypotheses." And if they take off that's going to be our high bucket like, wow [inaudible 00:53:26]. We think these things could become lightening on a bottle here, but they could also be a bunch of [inaudible 00:53:31] missed. But until we run in, we're not going to know. And if those bear out though, then yeah, that's our high. And hey, we've got a few things that we think are safer. Maybe it was validated a bit in the previous year, what have you. And these looking really the metrics this amount.

(00:53:45):
So it's helpful to give people though that construct, it deviates from it very hard deviates from this notion of like, here's the single number that we're going to hit. Just things that help people understand that space a little bit better and what to expect. And because of that it can be a little bit lumpy. There were some things that you released. Truly for the most number of years, can be easiest to talk about in this construct here, but there's one thing that we did that generated tens of millions of dollars in the pipeline, was really, really powerful and took, sometimes navigate and validate. Other times we did that onboarding stuff that I was talking about catching those things. That could happen on a little bit of a faster clip but still took some time to validate and understand. But yeah, over the course of a year you should generally be able to commit to movement. But help people understand the methods there so that they're not coming at you on a weekly basis being like, "And what did you do these past couple days?"

Lenny (00:54:44):
Okay, I got to follow up on a couple of these things. What was that big change of Twilio that lead to tens of millions of dollars?

Laura Schaffer (00:54:50):
This is part of the course that I teach at Reforge.

Lenny (00:54:55):
Oh, amazing. You get to work for Reforge with [inaudible 00:54:57].

Laura Schaffer (00:55:04):
I'm actually interested in retention, I think is my part. Right now, I'll give you links so we can [inaudible 00:55:05] in the show notes. But yeah, the high level version, this was deeper into my journey at Twilio. This is fast-forward a few years, build up this team and some cool things going on. But I was really looking for what's the next big thing for us to do? What could that be? And I noticed, remember that question very back of the day when I asked about the developer versus not developer folks [inaudible 00:55:34]?

Lenny (00:55:33):
Mm. Yeah.

Laura Schaffer (00:55:35):
We saw that little non-developer little dude ad was growing. We were actually the number of people in the ecosystem who were identifying themselves as not a developer were in the space.

(00:55:46):
But very interestingly they were, as we got more refined in our understanding of those folks, a lot of them wanted to build with Twilio. There was a hypothesis of like, "Oh well maybe they're lost, maybe this want pricing, maybe they [inaudible 00:56:00] mistake." And I was like, "Nope, they're here to build, they won't build." And they struggled through the developer on onboarding and some of them would succeed and some would... But anyway, it was all about identifying what did they need to succeed. If we were made them successful, could it contribute to dollars? One of the core learnings I'd heard from sales at the time was, "Hey, it's very challenging for us to get the folks when a developer's not involved yet to go from zero to one to get something off the ground. But man, if we can get them to do that, if I can get them in $1 and spend, I can get them to five. If I get them to five, and get them to 50, like 10,000, then I can get them to hundred thousand."

(00:56:39):
This whole long journey like, "Hey, Laura, if your team could just get them off the ground, man, we can do so much." So yeah, the journey is all about, okay, what were the things that were missing in the experience we were offering and ultimately was they couldn't write code from scratch. That was really difficult. And also we're going to stand up a server. That was difficult. But we ended up iteratively experiencing a way to validate those hypotheses and what's the right way to do this and yeah, that was great. It's called quick deploy on code exchange. Anyone can go there and deploy an app without having to write code and get an aha moment there with Twilio.

Lenny (00:57:16):
That is awesome. So basically it's like a low code Twilio app?

Laura Schaffer (00:57:20):
Yeah, it ended up being, we had a lot of pet names, nicknames for it. I think probably the one that most succinctly describes it as just, it ended up being a create your own demo experience which made you talk about the psyche of people. We talked about how developers telecom until can be intimidating. We'll talk about the non-development, sometimes the buyers or the people who are instantly buying decisions, for them, it was not only was it telco, but it was the developer stuff was inaccessible but they still wanted to jump in and they wanted to have that experience. And so this was a way for us to give them momentum, give them comfortable. Geez, I can get this running my development team, I'd definitely do it. And so it was a very powerful moment where we could really address the psyche of those users, get them excited about Twilio, and then give sales the ability to give something powerful to those non-engineering buyers and folks they're talking to.

Lenny (00:58:17):
So genius, looking back seems like an obvious win. One of my readers suggested that I start a series of the story of a feature and walk through the discovery ideation development iteration and this feels like a really interesting example of that. But anyway. I got just a couple more questions. I know we've been going for an hour now. But I have questions, I don't want to let you go just yet, and they're on growth. So one question is just you worked at Twilio, which is very product led growth. You're now Amplitude, which is more sales driven and I know you're trying to go more product led. I know Elena talks a lot about this, how every company needs to have product led motions, otherwise they're going to be disrupted by someone that comes product led. And I don't know what hires, which blanket would they fall into?

Laura Schaffer (00:59:05):
Between the AI like SLG and PLG. Yeah, for me they're two sides of the same coin. Product growth and sales. It's all to me, very thematically the same stuff. The difference is that with growth, you are selling with your product, and with sales you're selling with person like one-to-one. And so companies need to be employing both of those forces to optimally convert their audience. We're in a world where people are expecting both. They're expecting to be sold by your product and sold at the enterprise level. And large companies buy by human beings. It's going to listen to their specific needs and really break it off for them. And if you only have one, you're going to miss stuff. So absolutely, I think you want those two forces together working well. And obviously there's different stages, things work differently in different spaces, but I think when it comes to Amplitude, I think there's a huge opportunity here.

(01:00:06):
I think the key is, and that the challenge for companies that have done the sales thing and are trying to crack into the PLG thing really comes down to how you fundamentally are approaching that space. And again, your users and where they're at and the psyche of where they're at, I think a lot of companies will say, "Well okay, hey, we're going to do this PLG stuff. Let's take that sales enterprise whatever offering that we have and let's chop it up a bit and cut access here and cut out this feature here and we're going to slap this plan out and we're going to put a price on it and we'll maybe have hours of debates over whether it's like 10 99 or $104 or 75, and eventually someone will win that battle and slap it on and then [inaudible 01:00:54]." And anyway, the discussion of the focus is a lot around the product.

(01:00:58):
What are we going to do with this product? How are we going to crack it open and shift shift it in and then give it to these people, these users, these visitors? And what it's missing, I think is, and a lot of times it's easy to miss, is that when we're doing PLG and we're shifting from sales to PLG, we need to reset. We need to recognize that, again, this is sales, sales via the product. What does a good sales rep do when they're engaging? They understand what the problem is of the person in the space they're talking to. So we need the same thing here. What are the unique problems of people who are coming into our self-serve space? And I think when it comes to a company like Amplitude, a lot of the folks that will be looking to address via the PLG motion, there's a number of things we want to achieve there, but one of the primary things is to tap into the SMV market market and really give them a really startups and give them a space to land and to grow.

(01:01:57):
And again, you have to think what are the challenges and unique problems that they have because we're going to be using our product to settle them. We need to meet them where they're at with the problems that they've got. And I think one of the things that I've observed from being in all these startups and advising some startups is I very rarely... I don't think I've ever come across a startup where they have the right number of analysts for their needs. In fact, a lot of them don't have any. And so what that means is that the CEO is being an analyst to create their dashboards for the board and the product manager is being an analyst to figure out what the heck's going on and creating their boards for their product.

(01:02:34):
And that's happening all over the place is that people are in their roles and they have to be an analysts too. And I think that that's a problem that especially younger companies and early stage companies have. And so when they connect their psyche, what are they caring about? What are they thinking about when they're sending it for product analytic product or something? They're looking for something that's going to help them feel reassured they're going to be able to actually get to the bottom of the right metrics, create the reports that show things the right way. What's the best way to show churn? There's got to be a best way so many people are doing it. Guess what? Yes, there are some really good ways to do it and there are some really successful ways to set up dashboards for the board. People have done that too.

(01:03:16):
There's a lot of that knowledge that exists in one of those frameworks that exist, benchmarking. Are these numbers even good? And so, one of the hypotheses that I have is that if we take that perspective and we understand that that is the problem, that there's a number of things that we can do to really change the way that self-serve experience works to help convert people and show them how Amplitude can make them that powerful. But the thing that I think sticks across all companies, not just amplitude making the shift, is just that, that when you're doing this, do not think this is a copy paste, but chop it for parts thing. Don't start with your product when you're building at your strategy, start with your customers, your users, your prospects, the people who are going to be coming into yourself or flow. Make sure you are understanding how their problems differ because they do from the people that you're addressing at the sales led side. And then make sure that you're orienting your experience of product around those people.

Lenny (01:04:12):
It's interesting that you almost have to start again as a product company, as a product because you may need to solve completely different problems that eventually lead to the same place. But it's interesting what you're saying that you may end up targeting analysts or PMs. I know Amplitude or has always focused on PMs, but-

Laura Schaffer (01:04:32):
Yeah, it's right. And there's always nice thing about it is it's in some ways, it does feel like you're starting fresh because you do need to start with the customer again and what's their problem. But in a lot of ways, you can carry over a lot of the same knowledge. At that point you know what's working well. Amplitude for example, does have a ton of knowledge around what some of the best ways artists set up reports. There's a lot of things that they have the momentum going, like where do you choose that momentum and how do you put that and curate that in front of users and make sure that they're getting the right things. There's a ton of momentum already there. It's just a little bit about harnessing it and understanding like, yeah, where are the gaps because there are going to be gaps.

(01:05:08):
But anchoring in a customer problem as I think the way that you start any new product, any new thing that you're releasing, should always think about the customer and the pain point. So no different than when you're doing PLG for the first time or cracking into it. You need to be thinking again, starting again with the problem, the problems they have, the psyche that they have coming to your space so that you can build something that is going to effectively make them feel like, "Oh you can solve my problem, you get me." And show them how your product's going to do that.

Lenny (01:05:42):
Final question, and this is around developers. You worked at Twilio, obviously Twilio sold developers. I think Rapid where you work right before Amplitude also sold developers. Selling to developers feels like such a hot space right now. There's so many startups that are just building developer tools, such a huge market. Used to be not. Used to be like there's not a market in developers. They're not going to spend money, there's not enough of them. And now it is a big popular spot. And so I'm curious, what have you learned about building a startup and a product that sells to developers? I imagine a lot of founders building search tools would be really curious.

Laura Schaffer (01:06:16):
The first is that developers are just a very different audience from any others. I've seen so many people who have come in strong on growth really well or product really well with other audiences and like, "Oh, I'm going to take all those learnings, I'll pivot into serving developers." And as it being a very steep climb because developers are so different. And let me give you a couple just fun facts that make them really different. And some of these have some interesting stories. One is developers, almost two, one, do not look at your marketing website at all. They go straight to your signup flow. So what that means is all that beautiful context that you're setting and the product aid pricing, all that stuff, very often they're skipping all of it context free and going straight to your signup. And so anytime you make an assumption like, "Oh, well, they probably know this coming in to signup." Or like, "Well, we don't need to include, that's on the marketing website." None of that's going to apply to this group of people.

(01:07:15):
They're there. The analogy I have for this group is they're the IKEA buyers who when IKEA package comes, they're not opening up the instruction manual and reading in and then starting to go through, they're in there tearing open the bags and starting to pull the pieces together and trying to build it. They'll come up for context and steps and such when they get stuck if they're motivated. So that's one thing. And then another one is just the aversion to talking to sales. And I think hearing that, some they're like, "Oh yeah, well, I hate sales too." When I'm sent out and get bombarded by sales, that's the worst. I totally get that. But developers are on this whole other level. There was a fang company sign up for Twilio, built a POC, launched to production, all this, and operated in that space for months without engaging once with sales.

(01:08:12):
I was trying to reach them and I ended up being the one that talked to them first because they reached out to support because there was something about their delivery that was off ,there missing a feature and they did not want to talk to sales. They ended up talking to me when I was in product marketing. And that was my first exposure of like, these people not want to talk to sales. And then there's another one where a giant retail company where the engineering team signed up with their personal e-mail addresses so they wouldn't get bombarded by sales. It was only later that we found out. Anyway. But the thing that's most important, these are fun facts, but the thing that I would say is the most important, the thing to leave with listeners here is what makes them so different?

(01:08:54):
Why? What's the deal here? And it stems from their charter and their responsibility. So if we put ourselves in developer's shoes for a minute, a developer, if a developer is required to use your product, especially if they're the primary user, the primary builder, it's really important to recognize that they're responsible for that. If your service goes down, that's their responsibility. Not just for themselves but their team. If the pager wakes up someone because the service they bought from you goes down, that's on them. If, oh, it turns out that doesn't work with the systems that they said it was, well, that's on them. Doesn't integrate with the data the way that everyone wanted it to? That's on them. Everyone lives to developer when it's not working right and it cannot work right. In so many ways, that's their failure, it can cost them their job, it could cost them the trust to their team.

(01:09:50):
It cost them their reputation. And that means that the stakes are very high for them every time that they're adopting something new. So they can't afford to take someone's word for it. Especially a sales rep who might have some other motivations from their perspective, they can't afford to trust your content or someone's word. They must do it. They must prove it themselves. And so that's why, for developers to be bought in, they need to do something, build something, a proof of concept at the very least, if not moving further than that. And so that means they're going to be pretty darn deep in their self-serve experience with you before they're ready to commit. And so if you are a company that is providing, that requires developers to build, you must invest in self-serve experiences in order to effectively convert your audience. And you should be thinking of them. Something akin your self-serve function and growth folks, someone akin to Salesforce because your developers are not going to accept sales coming in and trying to convert them at that stage.

Lenny (01:11:00):
I love that you always come back to the psyche of the user and how in this case, developers like, here's why they're responsible for this thing. Salespeople are going to convince them this is going to work. And it's not. That's a really interesting tool and that's a really cool takeaway.

(01:11:16):
Is there anything else that we didn't cover before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Laura Schaffer (01:11:20):
Plenty. I think we covered it all, man.

Lenny (01:11:22):
You got all my questions and more. So with that, welcome to the very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Laura Schaffer (01:11:30):
I am so ready.

Lenny (01:11:31):
What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Laura Schaffer (01:11:35):
I'm a big believer in happiness. Not just being crunchy or we should all be happy, but also because it helps us do our best work and we're more creative and all this. So one is Simple Path to Wealth by JL Collins. I don't ignore the data, that money is something that often gets in the way of our happiness. I know so many smart people that just have not figured out the whole managing their finances thing. And this book will cover all of your basics. It's very easy to read. He's got an audiobook that he narrates himself. Simple Path to Wealth by JL Collins, he's fantastic.

Lenny (01:12:12):
What's a recent movie... Oh wait, wait, there's more?

Laura Schaffer (01:12:12):
Oh, there's one more.

Lenny (01:12:18):
Oh, let's do it. Let's do it.

Laura Schaffer (01:12:18):
[inaudible 01:12:18] Happiness, which is Atomic Habits by James Clear. If you ever want to change something about yourself or something's not quite working for you, this guy will give you a framework to change it. Guaranteed.

Lenny (01:12:30):
I really enjoyed that book. That guy's killing it. He was on Tim Ferris, he had a great interview. Folks that don't want to read it, they could listen to that. There's a lot of cool tips there. Favorite recent movie or TV show?

Laura Schaffer (01:12:39):
Unabashedly, the Great British Baking Show. I love that show. I love that show for all the reasons everyone loves that show. It's heartwarming and makes you feel good and uplifts you. But also because it is a competitive show. They're trying to be the best baker and they're out there helping each other. They're like a big family. Most reality competitive TV shows that I see, all of them are like cutthroat, they're sabotaging. So I'm just endlessly fascinated also by the psychology of what's happening here. I want somebody to do a research paper on it, get to the bottom of why they're all helping each other. It's wonderful though. Wonderful to watch.

Lenny (01:13:18):
Interesting. I always comes back to psychology with you.

Laura Schaffer (01:13:24):
I know. I know. I feel like I'm really, really sinking deep in there. And it's true though. It's very interesting to me, and I love that show.

Lenny (01:13:30):
What's a favorite interview question that you like to ask in interviews?

Laura Schaffer (01:13:34):
I love asking about a ship or release that is not cherry-picked by the person you're talking to. You can get it a lot of different ways. The thing is, everyone has a big success story. Everyone does. It really doesn't actually tell you very much to ask someone like, "What's a great thing you released?" Because everyone could tell that. Instead, take that away. What's the most recent ship is a really easy one because recency, time. But there's other things you can do to take that out. Just give them specific parameters for a ship that they've shared or whatever, and that will allow you to listen more and learn more about their frameworks versus the outcomes. Because if you're picking a random ship, odds are it probably wasn't fantastic. So they're going to want to talk more about how they approach getting there and that's what you want to know about to know if they're going to succeed, what their frameworks to how they approach things.

Lenny (01:14:24):
That is cool. I've never heard that one. That is a really clever idea. What are five SaaS products that you use in your day-to-day work? Can't say Amplitude.

Laura Schaffer (01:14:33):
I know, right? Still learning which ones we have here. But yeah, I'll just share the ones that I like a lot that I've used elsewhere. So one is Hotjar. Hot Jar [inaudible 01:14:44] also works. Just anything that allows you to put some quick little thing in front of customers, get that qualitative feedback we talked about. It's a critical, critical supplement to quantitative data to understand what's really causing the change or not causing the change [inaudible 01:14:58]. So that's important. I will say Amplitude is a fantastic tool that I have used and I would've said that if I hadn't just joined Amplitude so I got to use it... I know. I got to use it for the first time at Amplitude and it was awesome. So again, like asterisk, because I'm like working there now, but I do actually like it. And Slack, it's boring, everyone says Slack, but I just have to hand it to them.

(01:15:26):
It makes life so much easier and just nod their way. And then Builder, which I'll also put in asterisk on that one, but I really want to serve this. A lot of people don't know about it and it's really helpful. I do advise them so I'm in their corner. But this is another one I also say would be a powerful one. I think a lot of team gets stuck. They're relying on too much in their engineers to make changes. Again, we talk about rapid experimentation, getting these out, out, out. And Builder makes it really easy for folks to do that. Also, a headless CMS, you can drag and drop headless CMS so they do make it easy for non-engineers to make changes. So especially if you're trying to figure out how to get around that 80% [inaudible 01:16:11] that I mentioned, this builder would be a good way.

(01:16:14):
And then yeah, if you want one more, I'll give you Chat GPT, which is really boring and everyone's saying that, but I think I'll just say I don't have any crazy things to say about it except that I do think we all need to figure out how we pull that in to [inaudible 01:16:28] put people who don't do that are probably going to lose out or smart AI whatever bots. But that would be it for you, Lenny. But if you ask me in a few months after I've actually been an Amplitude for a bit, I'm sure I'd give you a different answer.

Lenny (01:16:42):
That's a good time to plug lennybot.com. And I wrote a newsletter or Dan Shipper who created the bot wrote a newsletter post about how he built this thing. And so you could go ask me questions using the content of my newsletter as answers. And it's very cool. Lennybot.com or lennysbot.com.

Laura Schaffer (01:17:00):
Amazing.

Lenny (01:17:01):
There we go.

Laura Schaffer (01:17:03):
I didn't know about that. Well, there you go. I've changed my answer. It's that.

Lenny (01:17:05):
Yeah, there we go. That's all I need.

(01:17:09):
Two more questions. What is something relatively minor you've changed in your product development process that has had a lot of impact on your team's ability to execute?

Laura Schaffer (01:17:17):
Yeah, the be embarrassed thing, like I mentioned earlier, be Embarrassed by the first iteration. If you are not embarrassed, you've gone too far. That really speeds up ships and helps people celebrate the unpolished as opposed to feel embarrassed about it. So just embracing that.

Lenny (01:17:35):
Awesome. And final question. I know you just started Amplitude, but do you have a favorite pro-tip for how to use Amplitude or maybe Hidden Feature people may not know about?

Laura Schaffer (01:17:44):
You tell me [inaudible 01:17:45], but I'll say one thing that was super cool actually that someone put together on my team at Rapid, literally before I left, he put together a video of how powerful Amplitude could be when linked up and integrated with other things like in this case Hotjar and Segment. There was a Amplitude report that someone had created and there was something that was an anomaly happening there. Users were using something in a way we didn't expect and Amplitude one of the reports surface it, but Al Kirsten, we want to know why is that happening. And so we could find out what the event is and then using by Segment, find out what that name was and look at Hotjar and actually go in and get screencasts of people doing that exact event.

(01:18:30):
And from that, we were able to form some really concrete hypotheses about what actually was causing it. And so obviously talking to customers is very powerful, but in this case, just that simple use of connecting and threading those technologies together could really get a good picture of that without needing to engage customers. So the tip would be how you can really amplify when you get an amplitude when you use it with.

Lenny (01:18:59):
Amazing. Laura, we covered a lot of ground, career experimentation, growth, embarrassment, psychology. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions, where can folks finding online if they want to reach out, learn more, maybe send you an appreciation or two? And two, how can listeners be useful to you?

Laura Schaffer (01:19:17):
Yeah, find me on LinkedIn. I don't post a lot. Yeah, I'll blame my three children. Eventually, I promise that I will. But I'm pretty good about responding to messages, so definitely link with me there.

(01:19:29):
And then what listeners can do, I think I'm always happy to hear feedback, suggestion, all that, but I'll just say I also know that it's a little bit crazy out there right now, especially folks working in tech. So I'm also cognizant what I might be able to do to help all of you. I know there's a few places I advise and rapids hiring. I know of a few folks that are hiring growth, strong growth people and product folks. So if you are interested in learning more about that, don't hesitate to hit me up. I want to make sure that I help as many people as I can in that respect because it's trying times and I'm sure you've heard it and read it, but if you're laid off, this is not about you, it's not your fault. It's this crazy world we're in. Things will get better. And I would be feel very lucky if I could help even one person land. So feel free to hit me up about that too.

Lenny (01:20:21):
Awesome. And maybe if you share some links, we could include links to open roles in the show notes.

Laura Schaffer (01:20:26):
Yes. I know there's a few that don't have JDs open yet. They're that hot off the press, but I'm happy to surface a few things there for sure because I know that makes it easier for people to know.

Lenny (01:20:37):
Awesome. We will do our best with the show notes then. Laura, thank you again for being here.

Laura Schaffer (01:20:43):
Yeah, thanks so much for having me. This was awesome and so much fun.

Lenny (01:20:47):
Bye everyone.

(01:20:49):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lauryn Isford (00:00:00):
An activation rate that falls in a lower percentage range, maybe for most companies five to 15%, is better than one that falls in a higher percentage range because it means that there's likely much higher correlation with long-term retention and you're really working hard to get most of your users to reach a state that they're not reaching today.

Lenny (00:00:24):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today my guest is Lauryn Isford. Lauryn was most recently head of growth at Airtable. Before that, she was a product growth lead at Facebook, working on user growth, internet.org, and growth of Facebook at India. Before that, interestingly, she led growth for Blue Bottle's e-commerce business. In our conversation, we dive deep into Lauryn's favorite topic, onboarding, why it's one of the biggest and most undervalued growth levers, what she's learned about optimizing onboarding flow through her work redoing Airtable's onboarding flow, what she's seen work and common pitfalls around onboarding, plus a ton of advice around figuring out your activation metric. I could talk all day with Lauryn about growth, but we had to cut this off to keep this to a reasonable length. Enjoy my conversation with Lauryn Isford after a short word from our wonderful sponsors.

(00:01:19):
This episode is brought to you by public.com, who want to tell you about their new treasury accounts which earn a 4.8% yield on your cash. That is higher than a high yield savings account while still being backed by the full faith and credit of the US government. Treasure yields are at a 15-year high, but buying US Treasuries is super complicated if you go to a bank or navigate an ancient government website, or at least that was the case. Now you can move your cash into US Treasuries with the flexibility of a bank account, you can access your cash whenever you want, even before your Treasury bills hit maturity. There are no hold periods, no settlement days, just a safe place to park your cash and earn a reliable yield. Public will automatically reinvest your Treasury bills at maturity so you don't have to do anything to continue growing your yield, and you can manage your treasuries alongside stocks, ETFs, crypto, and any alternative assets. Do all your investing in one place and earn 4.8%, a higher yield than a high yield savings account only with a Treasury account at public.com/lenny.

(00:02:24):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro, an online visual whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours and mine. I have a quick request, head on over to my board at miro.com/lenny and let me know which guest you'd love for me to have on in 2023, and while you're on the Miro board, feel free to play around with the tool. It's a great shared space to work closely with your colleagues to capture ideas, get feedback, and iterate quickly and easily on anything you're working on. For example, in Miro, you can build out your product strategy by brainstorming with sticky notes, comments, live reactions, voting tool, even an estimation app to scope out your team sprints. Your whole distributed team can come together around a wireframe and draw ideas with a pen tool or even put mocks right into the Miro board. And with one of Miro's ready-made template, you can go from discovery and research to product roadmap to customer journey flows, final mocks, you get the picture. Head on over to miro.com/lenny to leave your suggestions. That's M-I-R-O.com/lenny.

(00:03:27):
Lauryn, welcome to the podcast.

Lauryn Isford (00:03:28):
Thank you. I'm so excited to be here.

Lenny (00:03:31):
We've chatted a bunch over Slacks, like all these different Slacks we're in and Twitter and emails, but we've never actually chatted real time, and so I have a million questions that I want to ask you. So, thank you again for being here.

Lauryn Isford (00:03:42):
We have never chatted real time, so everybody's getting the first conversation and I'm really looking forward to it.

Lenny (00:03:48):
I know that you have this pretty spicy contrarian take on experimentation and that I think you believe people run experiments too often and maybe not everything should be an experiment. Can you talk about that?

Lauryn Isford (00:04:00):
Yes. So, experimentation is a really big part, growth culture, growth hacking culture, PLG culture, growth marketing culture, any kind of growth, at least in my sphere, and sometimes teams can be really, really dependent on experimentation when trying to grow a business. A great example of this would be consumer growth at scale. Think your classic big social company. I worked at one of them. I am a former employee of Meta back when it was called Facebook. When you're at scale trying to grow a social app, experimenting can feel second nature. It can feel like a necessary step in your product development process that you want to drive more signups or you want to drive better activation with new customers. So, you change some buttons, change a design, and A/B test it, and then see if numbers go up or down, and then make your ship decision based on it.

(00:04:56):
I find that there's generally two reasons why a grow team wants to experiment, and one of them is to understand more precisely the metric impact of what they're building and what they're putting in front of customers, and the other is risk mitigation where you're making so many big dramatic changes that there's some risk that while this could be really great for the business, it could also be really bad and it would be good to understand that before everybody's experiencing that in production. So, with that framework in mind, sometimes you don't need to experiment. Sometimes if the business, let's say activation, right, activation rates go up 6% versus 7%, that precision actually doesn't help all that much beyond being able to say in your performance review, "Hey, I increased activation by 7%." So, it also is expensive to have folks on the ground, be it engineers, analysts, product managers, spending time understanding the results of an experiment that could otherwise be spent on road mapping, on foundational analysis, on shipping things. So, experiments can be expensive.

(00:06:09):
So, with all that said, generally my advice is to experiment when you need to and to primarily see it as a risk mitigation tactic when you're making dramatic changes and to let the product development process do more work. So, spend more time with customers, be more rigorous in understanding precisely what problem you're solving, get mocks in front of people and see how they react, and hopefully have more conviction than you otherwise would when you ship something that it's okay if every customer sees it tomorrow and that the experiment doesn't actually matter as much.

Lenny (00:06:44):
It's so interesting hearing that from a head of growth person. Working at Airbnb for a long time, and you talked about this, there's so much value put into the amount your experiment moves the metric is so important to, like you said, your performance review, your team's status, your team's ability to show they were successful. People look at like, you drove this metric 14%, which oftentimes you add up from experiments you've ran. How do you work in a culture like that, or is it just in that culture you may as well run experiments because that's the only way you get credit for the work you do, or is there a way to just be like, "Wow, that is how we measure it, but it's still maybe not worth running everything as an experiment"? How do you kind of find that balance?

Lauryn Isford (00:07:29):
It feels to me like that is the default culture, especially as growth teams become organizations and as those organizations grow with companies into growth stage public company territory and beyond. However, I do think you can build a different culture, and the only way to escape the trap of experimenting everything is to have a very intentional culture about doing right by customers and doing the right thing for the business. A growth team or a growth org exists in service of improving the business and delivering results for the business, and whether or not you measure those precisely in an A/B test, you still shipped them or you didn't.

(00:08:09):
So, the rigor around your process was either there or it wasn't. This means though that there have to be other ways to motivate, reward, retain, and develop really good talent. So, a culture around the impact you had on customers as measured by qualitative feedback or as measured by deals that were closed or deals that weren't lost, or other kinds of indicators that you did the right thing for customers is important and there shouldn't be, especially in engineering within the world of growth, a culture around having to point to numbers to demonstrate your impact because if there is, then the team will biased experiments all the time, and that's not necessarily the right thing for the business. It's a very expensive cost.

Lenny (00:08:50):
Wow. It's so wild hearing this from, again, a head of growth, someone that's so analytical like you. Is there an example of something you launched that maybe most people would've run an experiment and you decided not to for one of these reasons?

Lauryn Isford (00:09:01):
There is a feature, a product really, that Airtable offers called Airtable Forms. It's possible you've used it. I'm not sure if you have, but-

Lenny (00:09:10):
No, I don't think so, but I will go check it out.

Lauryn Isford (00:09:12):
You can check it out. There are some new features I'm about to tell you about, so maybe that will entice you.

Lenny (00:09:16):
There we go. Scoops.

Lauryn Isford (00:09:18):
So, Airtable Forms is much like other forms products. You can create a form and then send it to anybody to submit. The people who submit your form don't need to be a user of Airtable.

Lenny (00:09:30):
Oh yeah, I have used that. Okay. It's just like the turn an Airtable into a form. Yes, I've used it. Okay.

Lauryn Isford (00:09:35):
Exactly. So, something we noticed is that there was a gap in feature parity for Airtable Forms where the submitter could not request a copy of their submission. So, I might send my T-shirt size to Lenny for a form around ordering swag for the company and then I might want to remember which T-shirt size that I ordered and get a copy of that in my email. We created that feature which as a result was gated on creating an account with Airtable, and we just turned it on and wanted to see what would happen because we knew from rigor of a wonderful product team doing robust customer analysis and also doing the data work that this is something that people wanted, that it was a feature that would bring value to customers, and that even if it didn't move certain metrics like a signup percentage, even if it might affect the mix shift of activation rate from folks who signed up, it would be net good for customers who were using forms and who were submitting them.

(00:10:35):
So, we did roll that one out without an A/B test. It did have a big enough impact on our signup metrics that we saw at top line and didn't need the A/B test to see what was happening. And we also were able to use attribution to make some analysis possible after we rolled it out so we could learn from what was happening to the base afterward.

Lenny (00:10:53):
Fascinating. That's a really good example, and I imagine that helps a lot when the head of growth is encouraging the team not to run as an experiment versus a PM on a subteam, like, "Nah, we don't need to run this as an experiment," because in that case you're already acknowledging that team, "You did a great job, look at this metric. Clearly this one moved. Clearly customers want it." So, to your point, basically this kind of stuff has to come top down probably for it to work well.

Lauryn Isford (00:11:15):
I think it does, and it also cannot be an excuse for rigor around building well and being precise in what customers need, but overall, if you can be a results-oriented organization that just wants to do the right thing and move with urgency, then in my opinion, that's the way that you can have the most impact.

Lenny (00:11:33):
Cool. Okay. I didn't expect to spend that much time on that question, but there's so much there. That was really interesting. What I want to spend the bulk of our time on is onboarding. Something that I found myself, and I think you agree with a lot of this but I'll confirm, is that I've done a lot of research into the growth stories of the most successful startups, and what I find, one, is that retention ends up being the thing you got to crack. If you can't crack retention, nothing else matters. And then, two, more interestingly, onboarding ends up being one of the biggest levers to increasing retention which basically A then B equal C, onboarding ends up being one of the biggest areas of opportunity for growth teams both early on and late stage. And so, I guess the first question, would you agree with that general sentiment that onboarding is this huge opportunity and often undervalued?

Lauryn Isford (00:12:22):
Yes, I definitely agree. It depends of course on the shape of business. Not every business should prioritize onboarding first, but if you have some sort of self-serve element of your product, if someone can give your product a try, maybe you have a playground or a sandbox demo, if there's a premium element to your pricing scheme, if you maybe offer things totally for free and don't even have monetization yet, onboarding is that first really important choke point that from which downstream of onboarding so many important metrics and results flow for the business, from converting someone to a paid customer to closing a deal to growing, how many people in an organization are using your product. So, all of that really comes back to onboarding and if you can get that right, lots of good things will follow.

Lenny (00:13:13):
Okay, great. I'm glad we agreed. I already know this, but you spent a lot of time on Airtable's onboarding flow.

Lauryn Isford (00:13:20):
Yes.

Lenny (00:13:21):
And so, I'm curious just to learn about what did you do over the time that you spent optimizing Airtable's onboarding experience, what kind of impact did you see through the work that you did there, and then just any big kind of general takeaways that either you think people should know or that you'll take with you to future opportunities around optimizing an onboarding experience?

Lauryn Isford (00:13:43):
We could talk about onboarding all day. This is one of my favorite things to chat about recently. So, we did have a wonderful activation team rebuild Airtable's onboarding flow over the past 12 to 18 months. This included many projects, including several big ones. So, what you've probably experienced if you signed up for Airtable recently or what you might experience if you create a new account soon is we've built an immersive wizard that we called Guided Onboarding that helped guide you through setting up your first workflow on Airtable, and in doing that reduced the cognitive load of getting started, helped you make more progress faster, and created scaffolding that more than 90% of customers would benefit from to be able to get up and running on a product that's pretty complicated. That was the first piece.

(00:14:39):
We also then introduced some personalization to use case on top of that. So, instead of helping you build something generic, having you build something that's relevant to you. And then we also worked on ongoing education. So, once you're in a workflow, once you've built something, how do we help you level it up to go from beginner to intermediate to advanced? One funny anecdote about this is that we actually called that project The Mole, M-O-L-E, because the design pattern in product looks like a mole. It pops up from the bottom of the screen and gives you tips as you're exploring. So, those are some of the biggest changes we made. We did retire a bunch of our tooltips which were a big part of onboarding for a really long time. So, happy to chat more about that, and then also did a bunch of more incremental optimizations as well. In general, tried to take a portfolio approach to what we did.

Lenny (00:15:36):
Cool. Okay. A few questions real quick.

Lauryn Isford (00:15:38):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:15:38):
What were the three buckets real quick? So personalization, ongoing education, what was the first one?

Lauryn Isford (00:15:38):
The first one was guided onboarding.

Lenny (00:15:38):
Guided onboarding.

Lauryn Isford (00:15:38):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:15:46):
What was the impact of this work, just to give people a sense of the kind of impact you can have on conversion and then whatever other metrics you looked at there?

Lauryn Isford (00:15:53):
We were working on activation for a few years before I arrived at Airtable. There was already an awesome activation team, hard at work. Overall, the investments we made in onboarding over about a six to eight month period that included the wizard, The Mole with ongoing education, and also some personalization together drove a 20% lift in activation rate for Airtable.

Lenny (00:16:20):
Wow. That sounds quite impactful, especially at a company at that scale.

Lauryn Isford (00:16:24):
It's awesome. I would say celebrate any clear statistical significant improvement in activation rate. It's a big victory, and credit goes to the team that really spent many, many hours with customers and designing precisely to build something that could have that big of an impact. I think it speaks to the importance of really understanding what a user needs to be onboarded well, which is not the same as what your business wants the user to be onboarded to. So, delineating those and building carefully is really what made it successful.

Lenny (00:16:57):
Which of these three buckets would you say had the biggest impact? Because I want to kind of get a couple levels deeper to get to what exactly did you do that worked really well.

Lauryn Isford (00:17:05):
I would say that the guided onboarding wizard which is the immersive wizard that helps you figure out how to get started was the most impactful thing we did.

Lenny (00:17:14):
And it's interesting that you had tooltips and this feels like a tooltip-y thing. What is it conceptually? What's the simple way to think about the onboarding wizard versus a bunch of tooltips telling you like, "Hey, Lauryn, click here, next go here, and then check this thing out"?

Lauryn Isford (00:17:26):
Totally. Imagine being in a step-by-step guide where you are asked question, for example, pick which kind of project you're working on, pick what kinds of things you'd like to track for this project, and then as you select from beautiful, easy-to-click buttons that require very little work on your part, something is visualized for you on the right half of the screen. So, you can see your workflow visually come to light as you do the work on the left half of the screen, and all of this is done for you in a very guided and instructive way.

Lenny (00:17:59):
Are there any generalized learnings from that experience of just how to do a great onboarding experience? It sounds like probably avoid tooltips, instead just kind of ask questions and show them progress as they're going through it in kind of like an immersive experience versus here's the product, check out all the cool features.

Lauryn Isford (00:18:18):
I think there is something to be said for reducing reliance on tooltips, but I'm not sure I would go so far as to say the tooltip is dead, as much as I maybe would like to because there are too many of them out there. The reason for this is that I do believe Airtable's customers had a very specific need which was that the effort required to build basic scaffolding was too much and they needed more support, guardrails, bumpers to help them through that, and this kind of guided or immersive wizard was the best mechanism we could come up with to reduce that effort required and to make them feel more supported in their journey. I'm not sure that this pattern is one that works for every product. I think it's one that works well for a complicated product, where figuring out where to go next and how to get started is actually very challenging or has a high cognitive load.

(00:19:14):
So, I would keep that in mind, but in this case, it did work really well for us. I have seen some other products in the wild adopt similar patterns which gives me confidence that it is transferrable beyond Airtable and that there's probably something to it. That's definitely a big learning. I think one other big learning for us was that we had to meet users where they are. We have some awesome advanced features of really cool stuff you can do with Airtable, automations being a great example. However, users don't necessarily need to get that started on day one. They don't need to learn about the advanced stuff when they haven't even looked at a workflow before. So, we really worked hard to prioritize what the user actually needed and to consider what was necessary education versus what could be ongoing education and building it up.

Lenny (00:20:06):
Can you talk a bit more about what that was? What did you actually do to understand the type of user, and then what did you change for them? Because we actually did something like this at Airbnb, and it was a tiny bit successful for host onboarding but it wasn't anything big. And so, I'm curious what it is you specifically did. Did you ask them a few questions and then grouped them in a group and then changed the way the rest of the flow went, or, yeah, what'd you do there?

Lauryn Isford (00:20:31):
Good question. So, at the very, very beginning, we sort of said new users broadly need help. Who are they? What do we know about them? How can we help them? We spoke to a bunch of customers and also watched them get started and looked for patterns in behavior and also clusters. So, someone who is familiar with databases, somewhat technical and prefers to and has experience in building things might have a different need from onboarding than someone who is exploring a tool that was recommended to them for a project minute. With that in mind, there were some clear segments of personas or buckets of users that we could split out to give different experiences. Now that said, when we rolled out the guided onboarding wizard, it was actually just one generic onboarding that was one-size-fits-all, and while escape patches are great, we felt like we could solve, as I think I referenced earlier, more than 90% of use cases or users needs with one generic onboarding to start and then we could personalize from there.

(00:21:34):
When we started to personalize, generally we found bucketing customers by their learning style and their building style was more effective than more classic segmentation, like do you work in marketing, do you work in product management, do you work in operation. The reason for this is that there are many different types of building or workflows that are possible in Airtable. Some are sophisticated for use at work, some are simple for use at work, some are somewhere in between and are for a hobby use case or a consulting use case. Knowing how someone would go about building was more effective than what do you actually want to see on the other side.

(00:22:19):
This means that something like a template which can give you an example of how to build a use case for project management can be helpful for inspiration but might not actually be the best way to teach you how to use a product like Airtable, when instead, we could learn that you're someone who needs more familiarity with databases to be able to get to the next level, or who might need a more visual learning experience instead of a more data-forward learning experience. So, we tried to segment the experience that way and found that that yielded better results on activation than some of the more traditional segments.

Lenny (00:22:52):
And how did you decide which segment that a user was in? Was it a question you asked them right at the beginning?

Lauryn Isford (00:22:57):
We had a really awesome research team that would do some surveys and conversations with customers away from our production experience and away from individual projects. So, we had a really robust read going in to the project of who these different personas were, different building types, different learning types. That said, we do also ask folks when they sign up some questions and depending on who you are or what we might think we know about you or want to know about you, we might ask you different questions and that's in service of helping you get started.

(00:23:27):
I had some big ideas for how we might bring this to life even further that might come to life in the future, such as if somebody's there to just help out, if they're may be a teammate rather than a builder, if they're just there to work with someone else because Lenny invited Lauryn to work on her table because he needed Lauryn to do something or update a sprint, whatever. Lauryn needs really different onboarding than Lenny. So, actually getting that data in the flow is really useful because then we can route customers to a fully different experience. It's amazing how much low-hanging fruit there is to personalize and segment that onboarding experience in so many products that are out there. You just need to be really detail-oriented and precise on who you're working with.

Lenny (00:24:11):
You talked about this experience as activation, and so just digging a little bit further into that idea. One of the important kind of metrics, milestones you got to figure out when you're working on onboarding is what is an activated user, what's the activation milestone, what's the activation metric. I know you have some strong opinions and some really interesting insights into activation milestones based on your experience at Airtable. Can you chat a bit about that and just share what Airtable's activation metric ended up being?

Lauryn Isford (00:24:37):
Yes. So, overall, every growth team needs a north star metric. It's so important to have singular focus on what the business results are that you are working to drive in your team. On our activation team, which as I mentioned focused on onboarding, though in theory there could be other ways that you want to focus on driving activation, we had one north star metric which was what we called our team activation metric. So, this representative, a team of people were activated on Airtable's product and using it in a way that suggested they would be long-term retained. For us, that was week four, multi-user, meaning in the fourth week, more than one person on that team is active and contributing to a workflow on Airtable.

(00:25:23):
This metric is something that our wonderful analytics team determined to be highly correlated with long-term retention. It's also a metric that holds a relatively high bar, so it requires a number of things to be true, that something of substance has been built, that people persist and continue to collaborate, that they're collaborating on a weekly cadence, and also holds a relatively high bar on exactly how they're contributing, meaning that the sum total of this is somewhat hard to achieve which means that we have a hard job and also a high bar as an activation team to achieve that for as many customers as possible.

(00:25:58):
In general, I think an activation rate that falls in a lower percentage range, maybe for most companies five to 15%, is better than one that falls in a higher percentage range because it means that there's likely much higher correlation with long-term retention and you're really working hard to get most of your users to reach a state that they're not reaching today.

Lenny (00:26:22):
I really like that heuristic. So, the idea there is when you're picking an activation metric, you want it to be in the single digits potentially because you're saying that's more likely to be correlated with retention because retention's probably pretty low long term. Is that kind of the rough idea?

Lauryn Isford (00:26:38):
That's a rough idea. Of course, the metric should be correlated with retention no matter what, but if 40% of your customers are still active at week four maybe with a metric that would be week four active rate, then only a fraction of those are still going to be active in month 12, in month 18, and month 24, and I would much prefer to pick a more specific, more precise metric that maybe only 5% of users reach, but know that those 5% of users will be with us for the long haul, and if we could get that 5% even to 6% or 7%, it would have huge downstream effects on long-term metrics for the business. So, that's why I would opt for a more specific metric.

Lenny (00:27:22):
Okay. So, this activation metric, week four multi-user active is a really interesting metric. Can you talk a bit about how you actually operationalize this and put this to work on your team to help people understand what to work on and make sure they're moving the right sorts of numbers?

Lauryn Isford (00:27:39):
Totally. So, one of the first things that we did when me and my team started to revisit week four multi-user active right before we started to rebuild onboarding is break that metric down into all of its component. So, if you really think about what goes into that number, how many teams sign up as a team versus as an individual, how many of them make it to week four, how many of them have more than two people invited versus more than two people who've ever been active, versus more than two people who were active in the fourth week, maybe they have one person active in the fourth week, and then what does active mean, and what are the different kinds of behaviors that constitute contribution or being active. Doing that really detailed work on the metric helped us understand what levers we could pull to have a really big impact on activation overall.

(00:28:34):
Additionally, we actually started using more metrics. So, we didn't just use our activation rate metric week four multi-user active to make all of our decisions. We introduced a few more, and one of them with purely a retention metric for an individual. Are you week two retained? Are you week four retained? The other was what we called Build with a capital B, and this was roughly a sophistication score. So, for someone who's building something, have they reached sort of intermediate levels of use of Airtable? The reason why we added these metrics is we were building new mechanisms for onboarding that were helping users build more effectively and find more value in Airtable, but sometimes those treatments helped users become more sophisticated but didn't help them invite more teammates, or sometimes those new mechanisms made someone more interested in giving us a shot for a few more weeks, but what they built was actually not any more impressive than if they had done it on their own.

(00:29:38):
So, this group of metrics actually really set us free. It gave us those constraints where we could actually measure success in a few different ways and think about activation as being more complicated than just a single metric and celebrate anything we could do to help on a couple of dimensions. So, I know it's a little unconventional to have a few metrics that you work with, but we did find that that was really helpful when we were making big changes.

Lenny (00:30:04):
That is actually really interesting. So, it makes it feel like the core activation metric you talked about was more of an output metric and you kind of realized here's the things we could actually be moving directly. Is that roughly how you thought about it?

Lauryn Isford (00:30:15):
Exactly. It also helped us grapple with some of the tensions we felt which I know a lot of teams working on activation and onboarding feel, which is picking one metric doesn't paint the whole picture of what you're trying to achieve when you help a user onboard to your product and when you educate them about what's possible. So, in having sophistication and retention and an element of team use all as part of the fabric of how we talked about activation, it made us much more well-rounded as a team.

Lenny (00:30:46):
That connects a bit to, so we worked on this post together about how to choose an activation metric and you shared part of this story for that post, and there's a little bit of a debate amongst folks that contributed their opinion on how to decide an activation metric, where it's a debate between is it okay to have a workspace activation metric where it's like how many boards somebody creates, how many Airtables somebody has created versus a user action, like user has created 10 tables or user using it two times a week. I think you're on the side of workspace is maybe a more interesting metric for a collaboration tool, and it's interesting that you end up with both in the end which I think is kind of where folks landed. You probably look at how's the company using this tool and then per user, are they using it consistently. So, I guess the question is just what's your take on user specific activation metric versus workspace level activation metric?

Lauryn Isford (00:31:39):
I really like this question. I agree it is a great debate. I'm not sure there's a clear answer because it does depend on your product. In the case of Airtable, which is a product that has seat-based pricing and generally horizontal adoption, it totally makes sense to have a workspace activation measure because you want to understand in an account, in an organization how many folks are actually using a product and finding value. That can be different for tools that might look like Airtable but have different mechanisms for growth or different pricing or different vertical personas that tend to adopt it. So, I do think there is some variance. I do have a reaction to share with you that's a little spicy-

Lenny (00:32:19):
Please.

Lauryn Isford (00:32:20):
... is that it's important that growth teams are agile and this means that north stars, key metrics, focus metrics will change, and if you're working on the same metric forever, there's probably some inefficiency in actually chasing the biggest impact for the business. So, I would be open-minded about if a workspace or team or account activation metric is always the right thing to focus on. Team activation looks really healthy because your growth team did some really amazing work on it, maybe user retention is the right place to focus next year. Maybe it's more about conversion. Maybe it's more about some other signal for long-term retention, and I would be open to being dynamic and changing that metric over time. Stability in metric is great, it helps with momentum, it helps with building expertise, but sometimes we overfocus on picking the perfect north star metric and by the time you feel like you've found the perfect one, it's actually time to move on to something different and work on a different opportunity.

Lenny (00:33:24):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage. Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click-through metrics and then set you to north star metrics, like activation, retention, subscriptions, and payments, and Eppo supports test on the front end, the back end, email marketing, and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, get E-P-P-O.com and 10x your experiment velocity.

(00:34:34):
Is there an example of that that comes to mind when you talk about being a little stuck on a metric? Is that something you went through at Airtable or anywhere else you worked?

Lauryn Isford (00:34:43):
I've gone through it plenty of times. We actually at the organizational level on the Airtable growth award changed our north star metric a couple times which is a big deal that manifests for several teams. Roughly the arc of that change for us was shifting from being a growth org focused on revenue to a growth organization focused on user growth and customer growth. This for us was a really important moment where we decided that it was most essential in our work to grow the business to bring millions more people onto the platform, using the product and finding value in the product, because we were taking a decade's long view that they could always become monetized or converted customers later, and there wasn't really a rush. We felt that focusing on revenue led us to make some decisions that were a bit more short-term oriented than would be ideal.

(00:35:39):
There's also a dynamic here where in the world of enterprise SaaS, the world of B2B SaaS, there's a new theme called product-led sales that's very hot right now, and this means that often in a PLG company there's some ideal end goal of handing off certain customers to have a sales conversation or to close an enterprise contract. In that case, you might actually prefer to delay revenue for months or quarters or years to manifest it later, and when that's the case, your growth team should be fully aligned in lockstep with sales and with go-to-market team and focusing on user growth is actually the right call. So, that's an example of a big pivot that we made, and in doing that, we felt more strategic clarity and were able to move faster.

Lenny (00:36:25):
That is an awesome story. How long did that process take and any advice for folks that might be going through a similar journey of maybe we should rethink our north star metric not and not be revenue? Any advice there?

Lauryn Isford (00:36:36):
In general, I would say having stability in north star metric for at least six months feels like table stakes to me and that's for the reasons that I cited before, for building momentum, for building domain expertise, and also for compounding impact in areas where you see success, where you notice growth flywheels that you can optimize. However, if you're reaching a point where that north star metric feels like it's old news, maybe you're outgrowing it, maybe you want to work on different things, I think that's great. Be open-minded about changing it up. I would generally try to start with the mechanics of the business and what you think you might be able to drive in terms of metric impact with the resources you have on your growth team. That can look different for every growth team because some of them have marketing, some are more product and engineering, some are kind of a mix of both or even something different than that.

(00:37:27):
So, I would start with what impact do we think we could have? Where do we think the biggest opportunity is to chase? You can literally draw a funnel on a whiteboard and map it out and brainstorm together, do some analysis on the side, and when you see what opportunity feels like the most important thing to chase, try to build a north star metric that reflects the output of that work, rather than drives all of your decision-making from the beginning. A north star metric should really be a measure of what you plan to do, the strategy you plan to deliver is delivering results for the business on the other side, rather than the other way around.

Lenny (00:38:05):
So, you mentioned trials and freemium at one point and I want to spend a little time on this, and I know you also have some strong opinions about this kind of debate. Another debate people have, there's always debates in growth, between offering a trial or offering a freemium product, self-serve, and I think your perspective is you should do both, and I think maybe you call it a reverse trial because I was doing some research. So, I guess is that true?, Is that how you see the world, and then just generally, why do you believe that that is the right approach?

Lauryn Isford (00:38:31):
What is it about all these growth people with their strong opinion?

Lenny (00:38:34):
Right?

Lauryn Isford (00:38:35):
I guess I have so many of them. You're educating me on my own perspectives today. Freemium and free trials. So, to get on the same page with definitions for all of our wonderful listeners, a free trial is when you can use the product for free for a limited time and then your only option beyond that limited time is to pay for use of the product. Freemium would be when there are multiple options for how to use the product and one of those options is an infinitely free version of the product. So, you can use Airtable for free forever or you can pay some amount and have access to premium features.

(00:39:14):
So, with all that in mind, personally I'm in the camp of offering a reverse trial. Funky name, but what that means is offer a trial but also offer freemium. Do both. The reason why I like this is you get an opportunity when somebody shows up and says, "Hey, I'm going to give your product a try today," to show them everything that's possible. Onboarding is a huge component of that. Help somebody get started, have those aha moments and experience initial value, but also this is your moment to showcase everything that can be done with your really cool product, and you have some limited number of days, maybe seven days, 14 days, 30 days, to showcase all of the cool things that your company is building for your customers. That is the beauty of a free trial. It's not just that someone can try your product without paying. It's that they can try even more of the product, all of the premium, amazing advanced offerings that could be possible if they decide they want to settle on a premium plan.

(00:40:17):
When you are deciding if this is something you want to do, I would actually take a big step back from looking at competitive pricing pages and getting into the details and reading blogs and just think about what your philosophy is as a business on monetizing customers. The reason for this is generally the reason to offer a free plan or a free trial but really a free plan, the freemium type of pricing model is if you value letting millions, tens of millions of customers give your product a try, even if they never pay you a dollar. That shows to me prioritization and value of user grab, brand awareness, and exposure of your product more than just revenue. And if that's the case, a freemium pricing structure can be really great for your product, and it give you the space to see if your product can become that household name that everybody is familiar with and can give a try and get some early value and even experience some aha moments.

(00:41:24):
On top of that, you can offer a free trial to show what's possible with premium value and then that really can just be focused space for you to say, "Hey, look what's possible if you pay us $5 a month, $10 a month," and you might even get some extra conversion out of that and some more paid customers. So, in general, that's how I think about it. I like the reverse trial because user growth is important and if you're in a long game where you're trying to grow a business for a decade or more, ideally you're trying to get millions of people onto your product and you can always have that monetization conversation later, but you only get a couple moments where you can say, "Hey, pull out your credit card or let's get on the phone and talk about an enterprise contract," with a customer before you lose trust or lose patience. And so, that focus on helping them discover value and build loyalty to you is much more important.

Lenny (00:42:13):
I really like this concept, a super cool name too. I'm also thinking back to some of the SaaS tools I've used that have had this where I go straight into the pro plan and then I'm like, "Oh, I don't want to lose all these features," and then I actually end up buying it. So, when I'm hearing this, it sounds to me like it's a better version of the freemium approach. I imagine there's still many SaaS tools that are very enterprise-y, take handholding, maybe this goes away. I know Elena Verna who's been on the podcast is just a huge proponent of everyone will be product-led, self-serve eventually, but until that day they're still like, I don't know, I think of Retool I think is very hands-on, handhold-y, front I think is like that. There's all these tools that people don't get really quickly.

(00:42:57):
And so, I guess do you still think there's a need for some of these tools that need sales and customer success involvement to stick with just trial at least for now, or do you think they should all kind of find a way to get to self-serve and a reverse trial?

Lauryn Isford (00:43:12):
I do really agree with what Elena said. I really look forward to the day when self-serve and freemium are possible for every product, but I also recognize that that can be really expensive to build and implement and is not for everyone. So, that's cool too. There are other options. In general, I think freemium and also free trials tend to be most effective when there's something that the person who signed up can actually do on their own without being handheld. It doesn't have to be full functionality. It can be exploring a sandbox or a demo or something they can poke around in and experience value, see that aha moment. That's great. That's a moment where you can give value to that person who's chosen to spend time with your product. If that's not possible, there are different ways to be creative that don't require having premium pricing. You can think about how to use concepts related to PLG and related to top of funnel adoption in different ways.

(00:44:16):
So, maybe you can create custom landing pages or experiences that help showcase value without a full signup or free plan or free trial experience. Maybe you give folks the ability to sign up and while they've sort of signed up as an interested customer, they're not fully experiencing things, they might not even have the option to pay for something yet, but they can learn. There's some resources. There's some education for them to experience. Or, maybe you can think about top of funnel adoption or traffic as being most helpful for extension within customers you already. So, if you've signed contracts with a couple really large Fortune 500 companies and somebody wants to join and signs up on your website from the same email domain, then you can provide an experience for them that might feel like it helps them learn the mechanics that's actually only available to folks who are part of organizations that already have contracts with you.

(00:45:19):
It's a different way of thinking about PLG and not necessarily something you would offer for free, they're already an enterprise customer, but some of those concepts can still have a lot of value and help you grow the footprint of an account in an organization, and those are definitely awesome things to try if you can't offer something self-serve.

Lenny (00:45:36):
So, what I'm hearing is find ways to make things some component of it self-serve so that you don't need to necessarily talk to someone immediately. They can start to understand some element of it on maybe an interactive planning page or some very simple part of the product.

Lauryn Isford (00:45:50):
Exactly. I think the key is to figure out what it would be like for someone to experience value when there's no human sitting next to them, and that value doesn't have to be full functionality of the product.

Lenny (00:46:02):
Awesome. Coming back to onboarding, and this is my last onboarding question, I have another topic I wanted to touch on. Do you have any just general pieces of advice, either probably this will work if you're working on onboarding/things that probably won't work and are common traps that people fall into when they're trying to optimize onboarding activation flows in general?

Lauryn Isford (00:46:26):
I do see a very common trap that I would love to caution against, which is that employees of a company build onboarding for customers, but they build what they think customers want rather than what customers actually want, and that manifests in an onboarding experience that's not very helpful. So, there are two patterns that I typically see. One is naming features. So, imagine you're using Airtable for the first time and you see a tooltip and it says, "This is automations," and it explains what automations is to you. That's not that useful for a user who doesn't really know what's going on yet because they aren't sure if automations are relevant to them, if they're suited to their use case, what exactly the word automation entails. We've named a feature, but it's really sort of an announcement of something awesome that Airtable built, rather than an application that can help educate the user on how they'll receive more value from that feature. Try not to name features. It can be very tempting in practice, even though it sounds easy in theory.

Lenny (00:47:32):
Before you move on, what have you learned about how to actually name things in such a way people understand? Is there some you do there?

Lauryn Isford (00:47:39):
Ooh, naming things in a way people understand.

Lenny (00:47:41):
Versus the feature name, like you just said.

Lauryn Isford (00:47:43):
So, instead of that, I think what would be more useful, given the constraints of using a tooltip that's pushing someone to try an automation would be to explain how the automation is relevant to them, or even better, to enable a one-touch turn-on of the automation feature or set up an automation to complete your workflow where we actually do some of the work and if you click into here, we will show you what value is possible and help you get it to the finish line. So, really focusing on that contextual application or helping to drive towards an outcome, rather than just educating on a name.

Lenny (00:48:23):
And there's an element of smart defaulting, just like starting to do it for them versus do you want this or not.

Lauryn Isford (00:48:29):
Exactly. There's also an element here of segmentation or personalization where you should be sensible about if everybody needs to know what an automation is or if there are only certain folks who actually need to learn about it and others might not need to know.

Lenny (00:48:42):
Awesome. All right. Back to your other suggestions.

Lauryn Isford (00:48:46):
Oh yes, there is one other suggestion which is if you're working on a SaaS product, especially a freemium product, there's probably some pricing and packaging scheme that explains which features are available for free, which features are not, how many you get, and sort of maps out usage of the product, both for free users if you offer a free plan, and then for premium users if you offer premium plans. I find sometimes teams working on onboarding will map onboarding to that pricing or packaging. So, for example, maybe automations, to use the same example of the same feature, is something that's generally premium, that if somebody uses automations they're more likely to be a paying customer. It can be tempting then for an onboarding team to try to push automations to people when they're getting started because of course, we'd prefer if customers use premium features because then they might be more likely to become premium customers, but that is not in the best interest of educating a user on how to get started.

(00:49:44):
So, I do think it's very important to be careful that you are rooted in the customer need and rooted in helping that customer achieve maximum value, rather than sitting in the priors of what your packaging scheme might suggest or what might be in the best interest of the company.

Lenny (00:50:02):
As a growth leader, how do you operationalize that? Is it set some drag metrics? Is it just philosophically, let's make sure we're optimizing the right metric? What's worked to actually avoid that problem?

Lauryn Isford (00:50:15):
I think north star metrics help because a team can be singularly focused on the most important result for their roadmap and their charter. However, guardrail metrics are equally important. So, an onboarding team that builds amazing onboarding that causes a 10% drop in revenue would need some sort of guardrails to make sure that they knew that that might not be the right trade for the business, and importantly, should have the rigor and passion to go deep and understand what caused that drop in revenue and figure out what it was about that onboarding that ultimately caused a guardrail metric to suffer. So, with that in mind, I think guardrail metrics can be very useful and are important to choose wisely. I love working with strong analytics partners on a growth team because rigor and education around how to think about guardrail metrics is something that we should always be thinking about, whether you are a data analyst in functional specialty or a PM or an engineer or a designer.

(00:51:19):
So, that's how I kind of like to think about it. I do think guardrail metrics help and then just being well reasoned and thinking about what's best for the business and speaking about your work as being what's best for the business and the customer overall, rather than being too narrow in your own swim lanes of what you work on.

Lenny (00:51:35):
Great advice. I want to shift to a different topic and this will be much shorter. You have this really cool framework for thinking about the PLG funnel, product-led growth, and interestingly kind of trickles down to the team you build, metrics you choose, and things like that. So, can you just briefly talk about just this framework that you use to think about PLG growth in the PLG funnel?

Lauryn Isford (00:51:55):
When I think about how to grow with PLG in a business that has some element of PLG, self-server, freemium, I usually start with a funnel that roughly maps to the same scaffolding, regardless of business. Whether I've worked on the business, whether I'm supporting the business as an advisor, I love starting with this framework. The first step is join, the second is evaluate, the third is upgrade, and the fourth is expand. This funnel represents the journey of a customer in a PLG product as they advance and develop in their lifetime of using the product. It starts with becoming a part of the account that's using the product or signing up, and you might join because you found Airtable on Twitter or you might join because Lenny invited you to use Airtable. So, there are different ways that you can join that product in the first place.

(00:52:55):
Then importantly, you evaluate if it's right for you, and that word choice of evaluate is deliberately not onboard or activate because it's about what the user needs to see that they are going to get the value that they want in using your product and in building a habit around it. Next is upgrade. Ideally, someone has gone from beginner to intermediate or even advanced in their ongoing education and in getting to know your product over some amount of time and they see premium value and raise their hand and say, "I will convert to it." Now if you offer self-serve premium plans, that's awesome. They can do it with a credit card right in the product. Sometimes this means raising their hand to talk to sales and that's great too, but they upgrade to some sort of premium experience or to more value than what they have when they got started.

(00:53:43):
And finally expand, and vertical says this can be nuanced but with more horizontal tools. Ideally, a few folks, maybe one, maybe a few are using a tool in an organization and then many more adopt it over time, and that expansion drives net dollar retention, it drives brand awareness, it drives more usage in more pockets of the company, it is awesome for renewal rates if you're working with enterprise contracts, and ultimately then also brings new referrals into the product that loop all the way back to the beginning at join.

Lenny (00:54:19):
I love it. And what's cool is upgrade and expansion kind of bake in retention. You're not going to upgrade, you're not going to expand if you're not retained. Can you talk a little bit about how you use this framework? Do you bucket? Do you have these four teams on your growth team that focus on each of these stages? Is it more of a conceptual framework? Do you come up with KPIs for each of these steps? How do you actually operationalize this concept?

Lauryn Isford (00:54:40):
I think this framework is a step to abstract to represent exactly how you should structure your teams or to be represented with four metrics, for KPIs. However, it's a really good conceptual way of grounding your team or your organization in the mechanics of how machine that is the business you work on run. From there, it can become much easier to communicate with each other on where you see opportunity on specific pockets of the product that might be impactful. So, for example, you might be working on a strategy related to landing pages and be able to name that that's going to help drive joins in new organization, and that's a really awesome way to communicate why you might invest there versus investing in something related to onboarding that would help with evaluate.

(00:55:32):
So, I love this framework because it helps everyone communicate clearly and also you can derive from it more specifically what are the opportunities that are relevant to us with this framework in mind, and then revisit it over time to gut check if you feel like maybe what you're investing in now is a bit outdated and needs a refresh, or if there are other pockets of the business that need more attention that you might be able to work.

Lenny (00:55:58):
Can you talk a bit about how you structured the growth team potentially based on this framework and just generally how you thought about building the growth team at Airtable?

Lauryn Isford (00:56:06):
We had what I think is a pretty relevant set of teams. If you're thinking about building out a few in your own product or organization that focuses on sort of a PLG shape of business, we had one team working on acquisition and they were really responsible for the join. So, they mapped actually really well to this funnel. One team working on activation and they mapped pretty closely to evaluate. It wasn't a full representation of what's possible in evaluate. We were pretty focused on the self-serve business and that was different than, for example, helping an enterprise customer evaluate the right offering for them, but that activation team was most closely tied to that second step in the funnel.

(00:56:50):
And then we had a monetization team that worked on monetization and pricing and they mapped really closely to the upgrade part of the funnel. They did touch some other things as well. So, they worked on churn prevention and downgrades. They worked on some billing related projects, but in general, they were most thematically aligned with that upgrade step of the funnel. One area that is more emerging that's interesting is expand. So, when we got started on Airtable growth, we didn't have a team dedicated to that expand piece and it became increasingly interesting to us over time as we started to notice that larger companies were using the product. This meant that there was a bigger opportunity than there had been before to really help drive expansion and get more folks using the product in those accounts. That's an area that emerged later. That's a really good example of revisiting your priors and being resilient or agile in your org structure because it wasn't something we set out to work on initially, but it became a really clear opportunity later.

Lenny (00:57:53):
You mentioned that Airtable is thinking a little bit more about B2B growth versus just kind of B2C where I think it's been historically. Can you talk about that and just how you're thinking about that?

Lauryn Isford (00:58:04):
B2B growth is an emerging space for growth practitioners and hobbyists like me because the playbook hasn't been written the same way that B2C growth or consumer social growth has been. It's a new space, and there are quite a few companies that are really excited about exploring B2B growth and how to apply the DNA and the mechanics of a growth organization to more of that B2B motion or to working with more upmarket customers or enterprise customers. So, it's very top of mind for me. It's a active conversation in the growth community, especially in San Francisco. Overall, I'm really excited to see what we can do by applying this approach to growing businesses, to new types of businesses. It will require some differences in execution model. So, in B2C or in consumer social as two examples, you can experiment at large volumes or you can make changes that impact thousands or millions of people pretty easily.

(00:59:15):
In B2B growth, generally you're working with a much smaller set of customers and also the risk profile can be very different because smaller numbers of customers that represent larger percentages of your company's total revenue must be treated with absolute care, as opposed to a world where you might have millions of folks coming through your product every day and small changes might not have as big of an impact. In an enterprise organization, it's important to be very careful and rigorous and to prioritize that customer's needs all the time. This means that rigor, that customer conversations, that beta testing, that live prototypes and demos are significantly more important and that face time with the customer is significantly more important than it is in B2C growth. So, we'll see what happens. I'm really excited to see more folks who have given growth a try in B2C or in consumer spaces try applying it to B2B because it will become increasingly common in the industry.

Lenny (01:00:19):
Well, with that, we have reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. I'll go through it pretty fast. Are you ready?

Lauryn Isford (01:00:27):
I'm ready.

Lenny (01:00:28):
All right. First question, what are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Lauryn Isford (01:00:34):
Ride of a Lifetime by Bob Iger. I give this to new reports on my team. Great book to read when you're thinking about your leadership style, and Rocket Men, really fun story. I love a good story about ambition and achieving awesome things.

Lenny (01:00:50):
What's a favorite other podcast, other than the one you're currently on?

Lauryn Isford (01:00:54):
I like Fifth & Mission which is a local San Francisco podcast on local politics.

Lenny (01:01:01):
Favorite recent movie or TV show that you have watched that you've really enjoyed?

Lauryn Isford (01:01:05):
I really like the White Lotus Season 2. White Lotus was very fun to watch. I also, on the movie front, I'm in a habit of watching Best Picture nominees every year and last year there were a couple movies I really enjoyed, one of them was Belfast.

Lenny (01:01:22):
Oh man, that was an intense movie. I watched that recently. And also, if we should turn this into a drinking game, every time someone mentions White Lotus, we drink. It's an amazing show, but it's definitely comes up often. So interesting.

Lauryn Isford (01:01:35):
Comes up too much.

Lenny (01:01:37):
It deserves to come up often. I love it.

Lauryn Isford (01:01:39):
That's true.

Lenny (01:01:41):
It's great, but that'd be okay. We're going to do a drinking game from now on and I'll have a shot here. Love White Lotus. Favorite interview question that you like to ask people?

Lauryn Isford (01:01:50):
Tell me about a time that you delivered something that was impactful.

Lenny (01:01:58):
What do you look for in an answer when you ask that question? What's your kind of a good sign and what's maybe a bad sign?

Lauryn Isford (01:02:02):
I'm looking for someone to help me understand how they define impact and what it means to them. I think a good answer for growth practitioner is intrinsic motivation about having an impact on the business.

Lenny (01:02:19):
Hear, hear. What are five SaaS products that you use day to day, and you can't say Airtable?

Lauryn Isford (01:02:25):
Figma, Miro, Slack, Gmail, and my fifth one, I need to think about it.

Lenny (01:02:36):
It's because I cut out Airtable. I got you.

Lauryn Isford (01:02:39):
I know, I always say Airtable. Airtable's definitely number five.

Lenny (01:02:42):
Okay. Probably number one. Okay, final question. Speaking of Airtable, what's the coolest use of Airtable you've seen?

Lauryn Isford (01:02:48):
There was a great embedded view, which is the internal term for when you put Airtable on your website in an embedded way so people can check out cool stuff, related to finding COVID vaccine when they came out, which was really awesome. I also appreciated that a similar use of Airtable has become quite popular this year in support of facilitating folks who've been laid off to help them find new opportunities.

Lenny (01:03:15):
Lauryn, this was amazing. I learned a ton. We got through everything I was hoping to get through which I did not expect. Two final questions, where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more and to reach out to you, and then two, how can listeners be useful to you?

Lauryn Isford (01:03:28):
You all can find me on Twitter. I'm @laurynisford. I love hearing about how folks with all different kinds of cool products are thinking about growth. In general, I find all of us are better at growing businesses when we study the awesome wins and learnings of others. So, please, my DMs are open. Send me cool things you're working on. I'd love to learn about it.

Lenny (01:03:51):
Amazing. Lauryn, thank you. Let's go drive some growth.

Lauryn Isford (01:03:54):
All right.

Lenny (01:03:57):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Luc Levesque (00:00:00):
We talk about the 10X engineer and we don't really talk about the 10X growth advisor or 10X growth person, but the same dynamic applies. You could argue it applies even more because the right growth advisor can have literally company changing impact. Something I've experienced several times in hindsight when you're like, "Okay, here's the needle in the haystack." And then it's implemented and you can see hundreds of percentages, sometimes over a thousand percent lift when you get it right. It's one of those weird disciplines where the right person at the right time can literally say a sentence that changes the trajectory of your company. You can't say that for a lot of different disciplines, but this is one of them.

Lenny (00:00:36):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Luc Levesque. Luc is currently the chief growth officer at Shopify. Before this, he was recruited personally by Mark Zuckerberg to help grow Facebook Messenger, Instagram and WhatsApp. He's also VP of Growth and a GM at Tripadvisor. He's also been a growth advisor to companies like Twitter, Pinterest, Patreon, Thumbtack, and Canva.

Lenny (00:01:05):
In our conversation, Luc shares advice on how and when to think about getting a growth advisor, including how to structure the relationship and what to look for in an advisor. We also spent a ton of time on SEO, how to think about this as a growth channel, who it's well suited for, and how everything is about to change in SEO with Bard and ChatGPT. Plus Luc shares a ton of really interesting advice around the value of self-reflection, building routines, cold plunges, also a couple of amazing stories about working with Zuck and what you learned from him. This is such an insight rich episode and I know you'll love it. With that, I bring you Luc Levesque after a short word from our sponsors.

Lenny (00:01:43):
This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel. Get deep insights into what your users are doing at every stage of the funnel at a fair price that scales as you grow. Mixpanel gives you quick answers about your users from awareness to acquisition through retention. And by capturing website activity, ad data, and multi-touch attribution right in Mixpanel, you can improve every aspect of the full user funnel. Powered by first party behavioral data instead of third party cookies, Mixpanel is built to be more powerful and easier to use than Google Analytics. Explore plans for teams of every size and see what Mixpanel can do for you at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny. And while you're at it, they're also hiring. So check it out at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny.

Lenny (00:02:31):
This episode is brought to you by Attio, a new type of CRM that's powerful, flexible, and built around your data. Traditional CRMs were built for a different era with totally different speed, scale, and data demands. Attio is different. It allows you to quickly build a CRM that matches your unique workflows and data structures. Within minutes of connecting your email and calendar, you'll have a CRM that's already set up complete with customer profiles and automatic data enrichment. You'll also have real-time dynamic reporting at your fingertips. No more slow deployments, outdated user experiences, or tedious manual data input. With Attio, you can build and adapt your CRM on the fly no matter your business model or company stage. Attio is the CRM for startups. Get started today and get 15% off your first year at attio.com/lenny. That's A-T-T-I-O.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:03:31):
Luc, welcome to the podcast.

Luc Levesque (00:03:34):
Thank you. Good to see you.

Lenny (00:03:36):
It's good to see you too. I want to start with a story that you shared once when we were hanging out in the past and something that I'll never forget, and it's about the time that you just joined Facebook and apparently you had some kind of big presentation you had to give to the entire company or the executive staff. And then I just love the way it kind of unfolded and it kind of gives you a glimpse into what it's like to work with Zuck and at Facebook. Can you share that story if that rings a bell?

Luc Levesque (00:04:00):
If remember the story, well, basically I had just started at Facebook about... I'll use those two interchangeably. I remember it as Facebook and I always will. I was three months in and was working on a new area for me. So I came in, started putting together our thoughts on a strategy and was asked to do a presentation in front of the company with Mark on the strategy. So I whipped up a draft strategy, put together some plots and plans, presented in front of the company and went well. And then every six months there's something called the [inaudible 00:04:32] Team Review of Facebook and basically product area leads will go in and present their strategy, how it's going. Again, I just joined three months before, so I walk in no idea what to expect. I am sitting at a table. You can kind of envision it's a big room, a really big room with a bunch of tables set up in a big square with a little microphone.

Luc Levesque (00:04:50):
So I sit in there, there's Mark and all the executives sitting on the other side. And I sit down and it's quiet for what felt like five minutes. I'm sure it was not, but it was quiet for a while, just sitting there waiting for what's going to happen now. And at some point Mark kind looks over, says, "Hey, we saw your presentation, saw your strategy. Now when are we going to start seeing results?" And that was my introduction to Facebook. It was kind of my introduction to working with Mark and was a pretty kind of intense thing to go through. Again, I just joined. The strategy was very much a draft at that point, but I think what it highlights is something that Facebook does really, really well, which you get very quickly when you join Facebook and it's why they're such an execution machine and can build a lot of great product. It's because they focus exclusively on that magic word, which is impact.

Luc Levesque (00:05:44):
And that was kind of my first introduction to working with Mark and just that laser focus on, "All right, got it. Now when are we going to start seeing impact and kind of moving from there?" So it's something that is very much in the culture there and something that is so important. It's something of course that we focus on a lot at Shopify, but it's that difference between, "I don't care how hard you've worked. I don't care what you're working on, what the activities are. What are the outcomes? What is the impact you're having?" I actually really love that word impact and focusing on it because it's vague enough that it covers off any work that is impactful towards the mission and it's precise enough to know what does that mean when you say, "Are you having impact? Or what is the impact we're having?" So it's a great way to approach things. That was my first experience there within a few months. And yeah, we jumped in and started focusing on having a lot of impact from there.

Lenny (00:06:36):
I love that story. There's a couple things there. One is, if I were in your shoes, I'd poop my pants sitting there for five minutes waiting for what do you guys-

Luc Levesque (00:06:45):
That did not happen. I had a report.

Lenny (00:06:47):
Okay. How did it go? How did you deal with it? Or I guess how did you respond?

Luc Levesque (00:06:51):
Well, we had, funny enough, already started having impact, so I was able to at least respond with, "Hey, we've kind of already started in a few ways" and walk through where we were having impact and just focus on the strategy, what our plans forward were and where we wanted to go from there. So I think that's how I responded.

Lenny (00:07:08):
Okay, great work. So something I've started doing actually on this podcast is I've started to keep a little Post-it of, here it is, of themes that continue to recur across companies that are most successful. And impact comes... It's number one on my Post-it here, is just impact comes up so often as something that the best companies continue to come back to and focus on and put a lot of emphasis on. I guess I don't know what the question is exactly, but is that just what you find in the work that you do with all the companies you work with? Just how important it's to come back to impact as maybe the primary thing?

Luc Levesque (00:07:42):
Yeah, I mean I think it's easy for a lot of leaders and companies to get caught up in how hard are people working, what did they do, and recognizing and rewarding activity. I mean, everybody wants to have impact. The companies that truly focus on that are the ones that break through and really make a lot of progress towards the mission. So that seems obvious I think when I say it out loud, but being in that culture and having it really ingrained in everything you do whether it's performance reviews or strategies or these reviews with the executive team, it all gravitates around impact. And I think it's that laser focus on it that matters so much. But I mean I've certainly seen it going other ways where it's more about working long hours. And certainly there's a correlation, to be clear, between working hard and impact, but I find it's just such a precise way to think about how people are performing or what you're doing in terms of is your strategy working? Is the direction you're moving in having the intended outcomes that you want? And yeah, I do think it's all about that.

Luc Levesque (00:08:46):
Being a growth leader where everything's so measurable, impact is something that can be very clearly measured and you know whether you have it or not. So the most important thing that we work on constantly is reviewing what's our strategy, what are we working on? Is that driving towards the top level north star outcome we want? Is that having the impact? And then basically doing everything around that singular north star. So it's very, very important. I think it's more profound than it might seem just from the outside. But if you've worked in different companies, you've probably experienced different versions of this too.

Lenny (00:09:20):
Yeah. I want to spend more time on this, but before we move on, you also have another Zuck story. Correct me if I'm wrong, but Zuck recruited you personally to join Facebook/Meta. Is that true? And then if true, what was that like to be recruited by Zuck personally?

Luc Levesque (00:09:35):
It was an interesting experience, very intense, but also one of the reasons for it was I was living in Canada and my family was there and I had some strong personal reasons why I couldn't leave Canada. But yeah, we had a lot of discussions with Mark. I won't get into the micro details of it, that's more Mark's story to tell than mine. But a few takeaways from going through that experience. As a leader, hiring is the most important thing as we all know. It's a craft and a skill that I'm always working on refining. I have my own playbook that I'm constantly tweaking, testing out different approaches, trying to find the best talent and assessing them and trying to close them and bringing them on board. So I learned a lot through that experience with Mark.

Luc Levesque (00:10:15):
A couple things that stood out were the first one would be that Mark really involved the entire executive team. It wasn't just me talking to recruiting or talent or HR or just Mark, it was the entire executive team. That's something that I think a lot of leaders don't take advantage of. I've seen leaders, I've certainly done this at times where you go it alone or you're working with recruiting, but the reality is all the leaders, all the execs in the company know how important it's to bring in talent and they're always more than happy to help. So that's something that I think more leaders should do is really recruit all of their peers and their leaders in the company to help close. And that's certainly something that happened when I was in discussions with Mark and Facebook about joining.

Luc Levesque (00:10:55):
The second one, which I had I suppose never experienced before, was that they made it very personal. I had these reasons why I couldn't leave. So initially I was excited by the opportunity, but I couldn't see myself moving to California for personal reasons. And through discussions, Mark basically involved my wife, involved my spouse in this, Andrea. We flew down, had dinner with him and Priscilla, his wife. Andrea had ended up meeting with many of the executives at Facebook and really talking through what was holding us back, why we couldn't come, potential options and ideas for how we could come down.

Luc Levesque (00:11:33):
But involving somebody's spouse and family I think is a really good idea because it's a very personal decision to change company. It involves more than just that person you're talking to, it involves the whole family. So that was something that I think is an important thing to have in your kind of playbook for hiring, is really think about the whole person's family and involve them if you can. In fact, Toby did this as well at Shopify. He flew down here with Fiona and we had breakfast with Andrea and them and reviewed a few offers when I joined Shopify.

Luc Levesque (00:12:03):
And then the third thing is just to be absolutely relentless and don't give up and don't let momentum drop. It took seven months for me to go from, "This is amazing, exciting, but there's no way I can make this work" to, "Okay, let's move to Palo Alto." And Mark, the execs, a variety of leaders there were in discussions for months and months and months and never letting the momentum die. That's something that I think is really important. No doesn't necessarily mean no, and in this case it definitely wasn't the case. I had the same experience with Toby at Shopify where we've been talking about working together for over 10 years now. And then finally the timing was right and I was able to join the company.

Luc Levesque (00:12:45):
So just be relentless, involve the family, involve the spouse if you can, and recruit some help from other executives in the company. Those were some of the things that stood out through my experience. But yeah, it was a pretty wild time in my life.

Lenny (00:13:00):
Relentless is actually another word. I wasn't necessarily I'm supposed to yet, but I feel like it's another trend to cross. The most impactful and successful founders is just this like, "I will not give up. I will keep at it."

Luc Levesque (00:13:09):
[inaudible 00:13:10].

Lenny (00:13:10):
And so that's a really interesting example of that in action. I was going to talk about this later, but maybe it's a good time to talk about it now, which is around hiring. So you talked about you have this playbook for how to hire. You mentioned to me that you kind of find that as you scale as a leader, hiring ends up being like the most important skill maybe, maybe one of the most important skills. I'd love to hear your take on just what you found about hiring as you've grown as a product leader.

Luc Levesque (00:13:33):
Well, I think you reach a point in your career where you realize that hiring is the skill you now need to become world-class at because you're not no longer doing the work yourself. You're still of course involved and doing some of the work and getting your hands dirty, but the bulk of your team's success now will be the quality of the hires you make and you truly need to be world-class at that. So yeah, I built this playbook out. I was in Canada in Ottawa when I sold that company, Tripadvisor, and really started growing my team and becoming more Leaning into leadership at the time through that experience.

Luc Levesque (00:14:07):
One of the benefits of being in Ottawa and kind of off the grid if you will, is it's a curse and a benefit as that you don't have a ton of people you can learn from. So it does mean you need to go to first principles and think things through from the ground up. It takes a little longer, but you come up with your own playbooks on how to do things. I think you've seen my blueprint, which is a good example of that where I have this blueprint I put together. When new people join the team, I show them my blueprint, which is basically a list of my quirks so we can really quickly align. That's something that just being in Ottawa and trying to figure out how to be a leader and avoid mistakes, I was like, "Wouldn't it be nice if you had a blueprint? When somebody joined, you can just tell them all of your quirks and you can just quickly calibrate on how it is to work together versus through awkward long discussions over the course of a year."

Luc Levesque (00:14:51):
My hiring playbook's a similar thing. I think of it in three different chapters, if you will. There's finding talent, assessing talent, and closing talent. In terms of finding talent, I do believe that the best predictor of future performance is past performance. So I'm looking for what I call signs of excellence. So I want to know the top people generally have done multiple amazing things in their life, repeated success, not just once. Maybe it was work related, maybe not work related. But generally speaking, if you think back to the stars you've worked with, they've done some amazing things. And that's why I always start when I interview or when I chat with people, I started talking about just trying to understand, "What has been your path? What have you done professionally and not professionally?" And generally, stars going to stand out. It's very rare that there's not something obvious that comes through.

Luc Levesque (00:15:39):
So for myself personally, I'm looking for kind of three different signs of excellence to tell me that it doesn't have to be three. The mental model I have is as you're talking to them, you're getting pluses and negatives. There's red flags you're hearing and there's really great things. And then at the end you can make an opinion of how good this person is.

Luc Levesque (00:15:56):
Another great sign of excellence, and this was just through reflecting on stars on the team and thinking what makes them unique, what about them. One of them is when somebody's boss leaves the company and then comes back to poach them, that is such a strong signal because if you think of what just happened, the leader who knows exactly how good this person you're talking to is, they have the most knowledge of the performance of this individual, they left the company. They've come back to poach them, putting their own reputation at risk by coming back depending on the situation. And they would never do that unless this person was really, really good.

Luc Levesque (00:16:37):
So you don't want to over pivot on one signal, you want to look at the full picture. But those are the types of things I look at to bring in top talent. And I've got this whole playbook, mistakes I've made that I've learned from, things to avoid. And over the years, yeah, I've put together this playbook that I try to follow and I'm always running little experiments to try to make it better.

Lenny (00:16:56):
Were going to that blueprint that you mentioned. A lot of which you're talking about is probably more relevant to senior executive type people because you're looking for... Or maybe not because you're looking for say three.

Luc Levesque (00:17:06):
[inaudible 00:17:06].

Lenny (00:17:06):
Okay. So people early in their career could also have three, say, moments of excellence?

Luc Levesque (00:17:12):
Yeah, I mean just thinking off the top, it depends on the type of person you're hiring, but are they a founder? Have they tried to do something? Did they win an award somewhere? Are they a gold medalist at something? Have they done something that others have not that shows grit, that shows drive, that shows the ability to succeed? And I've seen that you can apply that to any candidate you're hiring.

Lenny (00:17:36):
The implication there is, without that, they're probably not going to be stars, that there's a strong correlation between having signs of excellence and them performing really well in this role.

Luc Levesque (00:17:45):
Correct, exactly. Yeah, I mean I suppose it's possible, but it would be pretty rare that somebody would come in without some sign that they stand above the crowd. And again, I'm talking about you generally want to hire the top 1% of candidates. So when you're looking for the best of the best, you definitely are looking for those signals.

Lenny (00:18:01):
Awesome. Okay, so I'm going to bring us back on the agenda that I had for myself, which is I want to start with talking about advisorships and advising and growth advisors. You've been a growth advisor for a long time to some of the most amazing companies out there, Twitter, Pinterest, Patreon, Canva, Thumbtack. I'm sure there's others that you don't list that are more informal. Now you work at Shopify. And so what I think about here is a lot of founders often think about, "Should I bring on an advisor? What should I look for an advisor? I've heard stories of advisors being useless sometimes. People tell me I don't need advisors." So I guess the question here is just what's your take on when it makes sense to bring on and consider bringing on a growth advisor and what should people look for when they're exploring and talking to a potential growth advisor?

Luc Levesque (00:18:47):
A few thoughts. In terms of when, I don't think you can probably come into early. It's probably harder to find really good ones than it is to time it. But generally speaking, I would say you don't want to focus too much on growth until you have product market fit. So make sure you have a product that users love that's either showing strong signs of retention or has some good loop that you can see that you can start thinking about growth.

Lenny (00:19:08):
Let me follow on that thread real quick because I find some founders still want to have someone come help them with growth even though they know they don't have product market fit, even though this tip comes up every single time when I'm talking to growth person, like, "Wait till you have product market fit before doing growth stuff." So could you just add a little bit of why that's important while we're on that topic?

Luc Levesque (00:19:27):
Growth advice is generally always applicable. And if you can start thinking about how to build your product early, even if it's pre-product market fit, you're not going to do any damage, but you may be wasting some capital on an advisor or a growth person too early. The problem that I see is if you start growing a product that doesn't have product market fit, you're actually doing more damage than good because you have a product that is now being exposed to the market through growth levers and through optimization that is giving a bad experience with your product. And you want that product that you know is tight and you know has product market fit to start building the flywheel and start growing. You don't want it to be growing if it doesn't satisfy that need that you're trying to build out for. So I can see it having more damage than good because when somebody tries something, they're unlikely to try it again. And so that's the dangerous game you can get into. So you're better off with a good product that's satisfying a need and then growing from there.

Luc Levesque (00:20:20):
I will say to kind of play devil's advocate with myself and something that I've done actually in one of the products, I've built several consumer products and grown them, is that sometimes to know if you have a product, you need users to use it. So there's like some subtlety in here, but I would say if you are trying to get users in to start playing with it at scale, I mean try to focus in on a market that is maybe off the grid. Like pick some English-speaking country that's a bit off the grid that you can isolate your marketing to so you can start getting dozens or a couple hundred people per day coming in and giving you feedback.

Luc Levesque (00:20:58):
I've seen that work too. So I'd say wait till you have product market fit. If you do start growing your product early because you need that signal from people actually using it beyond just focus groups and friends or small numbers of people, try to do it off the grid in smaller markets that you can get kind of contain the growth and get what you're really trying to get, which is that signal on is it working or not.

Lenny (00:21:19):
Awesome. Okay, I threw us off track. Let's get back on track. So we're talking about when it makes sense to find a growth advisor and then what to look for and so on that you might want to work with.

Luc Levesque (00:21:27):
I mean, what makes a great growth advisor is somebody who really understands what to do but also why certain growth levers work. It's that kind of deep understanding of levers of onboarding or whatever area they're focusing on that really makes growth advisor stand out. So when you're looking for a growth advisor, you want to have those discussions to see like, "How much depth does this person have? Have they seen a playbook and they're just good at repeating the playbook or are they evolving, are they growing?" The best way to get to know that is to start really asking them questions about growth and growth advising and the certain things that they've done and why they think those have worked.

Luc Levesque (00:22:09):
This can be tricky if you don't yourself know growth. So I think one thing that I have not seen a lot of founders do that I would advise is if you have an advisor already... Because this applies to finding growth advisors, but it also applies to hiring good growth talent. So if you have somebody you know whether it's already an advisor or somebody who knows growth, you can solicit their help in trying to flesh out whether somebody you're trying to hire is of high talent. So if you have an advisor, you can make that one of their roles is vet out any new talent coming in. And if you're looking for an advisor, try to find somebody that you know and trust who can do that first pass. Because for somebody who knows growth that you trust, it's actually not a lot of work for them to vet out how talented someone else's. It's an easy ask to make and something that if you have that person in your network or that worked with you that you can leverage for.

Luc Levesque (00:23:01):
But I haven't seen that too often where founders kind of take advantage of people they know or existing growth advisors to help recruit and vet talent because it can be quite hard if you don't know the growth space to know if somebody's good or not.

Lenny (00:23:15):
That's a really interesting idea and it could be where you find someone that's too busy to work with you, but maybe you could just ask, "Hey, could you just easily help me vet people?" And it takes a lot less time.

Luc Levesque (00:23:26):
Yeah, I've never been asked that, which is, I mean I don't know if I'll start getting asked this now, but it does seem like that's a really simple way to add a ton of value. And as a founder, I mean even if you have to pay this person or whatever you have to do, but it's such an important hire to get right. We talk about the 10X engineer and we don't really talk about the 10X growth advisor or 10X growth person, but the same dynamic applies. You could argue it applies even more because the right growth advisor can have literally company changing impact where they're either building or helping to ideate or helping to implement a growth loop that literally changes the company. As we know, you need a great product and you need a great growth loop. And it's usually just one loop that you need to get right. Most companies have gotten to where they are just off of one really strong channel that they've just dominated, so it's important to get right.

Lenny (00:24:17):
Is there an example of that sort of impact that you've seen in your advisorship or other people's of just an impact from one conversation or a little bit of a help?

Luc Levesque (00:24:25):
Definitely. And I think what I would point to is the advantage of a growth advisor is it takes a long time to understand a channel. Certainly people have to know their stuff, they have to be very good at their craft, their growth craft, but also they have to be exposed to a large set of experiments or an environment where they've just seen what works and what doesn't. So no matter how good somebody is, if they haven't been exposed to an environment where there's a lot of experimentation, a lot of learning, it's very hard for them to internalize that. So once a growth advisor has that, it's takes years to learn it, but it literally can take seconds literally to communicate that. So I've worked with some companies that you've mentioned and certainly have had impact very quickly.

Luc Levesque (00:25:09):
I mean, one example would be a company that I worked with. Now, a public company. At the time, they weren't. On day one, walked in, they presented their strategy, their plans, their funnels and their landing pages. I could see very quickly that there was something they were doing that was a little off and I asked them, "Well, why are you doing it that way?" And they said, "Well, we think it just looks better that way." And I said, "Well, just do it this other way." I remember this because it was such a short conversation and then three weeks later we connected and I heard they had rolled it out and it was a large impact that they had from this one change. This has happened many times with the companies I've worked with, but it's a good example that once you know it, it's not hard to recognize it if you deeply understand it to give advice, but it takes a long time to get the base knowledge.

Luc Levesque (00:26:02):
So I don't do these too often anymore, but when I do advise, I take them very seriously. I focus exclusively on having impact. I think that's really important because like you say, there's a lot of advisors out there. Some of them are great, some of them different qualities, and you really want to make sure that if you are an advisor, you want to be in the camp of when this person comes in, they have a lot of impact and it takes time and focus and energy and alignment and there's a bunch of things we can talk about that that helps to drive that alignment. But having impact is the most important thing, whether you're an advisor or if you're hiring because it's one of those weird disciplines where the right person at the right time can literally say a sentence that changes the trajectory of your company. You can't say that for a lot of different disciplines, but this is one of them.

Lenny (00:26:49):
There's that word impact again,

Luc Levesque (00:26:51):
Impact. Impact.

Lenny (00:26:52):
The point you just made about how one conversation can have a ton of impact is a reminder of why sometimes the price of an advisor feels absurd where like, "For one hour it's like thousands of dollars," but it's because obviously they spent a decade learning a thing and one conversation is all of that work they put into it crystallized for you in the moment.

Luc Levesque (00:27:13):
Exactly. It's something I've experienced several times in hindsight when you're like, "Okay, here's the needle in the haystack" and then it's implemented and you can see hundreds of percentages, sometimes over a thousand percent lift when you get it right. It's exhilarating. It's great. I have something I used to say, which is, you want your impact to be so big there's a slide in the next board deck on try to explain what happened. That can happen when you are advising companies because you're able to share a very quickly insights. But one way to drive alignment is not everybody can do this, not all advisors do it this way, but I personally love just when I do these, which is not that frequent, just purely doing equity because I love the alignment in outcomes where the founder will be successful and you will be successful. So the incentives are really good to drive the right performance and the right outcomes that you want as a founder.

Luc Levesque (00:28:09):
So if you can do it, I would definitely advise founders to bring advisors in for equity if you can. I think the same applies for your internal growth team. You want to make sure that the teams are incentivized not on activities, on doing stuff, because there's a lot of stuff to be done in growth, but really driving the outcomes that you want. And equity's just a great way of saying, "Hey, we're in this together. We're on the same side of the table. Let's go grow this company."

Lenny (00:28:36):
I was actually about to ask you what kind of structure you recommend for an advisorship. Is there anything else you can share about just what you'd recommend a founder do in terms of compensation for an advisor?

Luc Levesque (00:28:45):
There's a couple things. I'm a big fan of equity because of the alignment of incentives. You should think about, without getting into too much detail of the actual structure of the deals, but think about how you vest the equity. The last thing you want is an advisor holding back on sharing knowledge. The ideal engagement would be an advisor comes in, delivers as much value as possible quickly, and then trains your team. And then maybe it's a one-year engagement and hopefully they've learned because the advisor has been incentivized to share as much as possible and to train the team as much as possible. And then ideally you don't need them anymore after. So there's something there about structuring equity vesting. I'm a big fan of vesting earlier rather than later. So think about in terms of structure you're vesting, commensurate with the value you want, which is very much front loaded.

Luc Levesque (00:29:35):
I'm also a big fan of three month cliffs. Something I've done, I always do actually, is listen, in the first three months you'll know both sides if it's working or not. And you want to de-risk that on both sides because it really should be seen as a partnership between the advisor and the founder. If the founder thinks you're not adding value in the first few months, I think they should just tear it up and both sides move on. It's not good for the founder to continue the deal and it's not good frankly for the advisor because they're not, for some reason, able to add value in that environment. So I love a three-month cliff at the beginning where if it's not working in the first three months, you tear up the deal and both parties walk away and de-risk the entire thing, and again, drives incentives in the right way where the advisor is 100% incentivized at as much value as fast as possible. And so that's another thing that I tend to do and I've done it for a long time.

Lenny (00:30:28):
That's a really good tip. Basically don't do it for a year if you're vesting for advisors, probably not even to a year, but yeah.

Luc Levesque (00:30:33):
There's a bunch of ways to do it. Honestly, it's hard enough to find growth advisors that have capacity, so you got to also say like, "What can you do that the advisor's comfortable with?" But yeah, I mean just to be candid, I think you want to structure in a way where you're not dependent on the advisor over time. They're adding a ton of value, they're helping teach the team, they're probably bouncing around because your company's changing, your team's changing, your leaders are changing. But over time, and that can be years, but it shouldn't be indefinite. You shouldn't need an advisor forever.

Luc Levesque (00:31:04):
I've seen a scenario where there's desire to keep the advisor on almost as insurance, like, "If something goes wrong, I just wanted to be able to pick up the phone." That can make sense. But I do think a good growth advisor is incentivized to share as much as possible, as fast as possible to have impact to train your team. And then whether you want to keep them on or not long term as an insurance policy or just to answer questions as things change, that should be a choice and not because, "If we lose the advisor. We're completely screwed." That would be a bad place for you to be in as a founder.

Lenny (00:31:35):
You said it's hard to find a good advisor, 100% agree. Any advice for people to help them find an advisor that might be the right fit?

Luc Levesque (00:31:43):
Yeah, I would say there's more of them these days than there were even just five years ago or 10 years ago. Depending on your situation, if you're a founder, I would start with your investors. I think VCs have an amazing network of advisors. I get, I don't know, a couple requests a week that I'm not taking right now. But that from my experience and what I've seen, that's probably especially the high end VCs, the very talented VCs will have this network. And frankly, it's a great partnership as an advisor for you to have. You can help the companies, you can help the VCs and it helps you. So everybody wins, just asking other founders that had good experience, much like hiring.

Luc Levesque (00:32:21):
The third advice I would give is to find companies that are world-class at what you're trying to grow, what channel or skill you're looking at, and then reach out and see if there's a way to help that way. That's actually how I got started. I was at Tripadvisor and a prominent VC reached out. One of the companies they were working with needed some help on SEO. I was still in Canada at the time, got connected with them, had a phone call, had a significant impact through that one phone call. And rather than joining as an advisor, I essentially helped them out pro bono in exchange for, "Hey, I want to get connected in the Valley." So I was in Canada, I wanted to start another company, I wanted to get connected. So through that tactic where they reached out to a company that was known to be world-class at SEO, I think that was really smart on this VC's part.

Luc Levesque (00:33:13):
And then maybe some advice to up and coming growth advisors would be that first one, I didn't take a single shred of equity or money and just tried to have as much impact as possible and to help out this company as much as possible and then make sure that I was able to get connected to other people that I wanted to meet in the Bay Area. And then kind of things snowballed from there.

Lenny (00:33:33):
I definitely want to chat about how to become a growth advisor because I think people listening here might be like, "Oh, that sounds pretty good. Someday maybe I'll become a growth advisor." But before we get to that, what are things that an advisor are best suited for versus finding someone full-time versus no one? What are the ideal kind of problem sets for an advisor versus say, full-time hire person?

Luc Levesque (00:33:57):
I would say your preference should always be to have somebody in-house. I'll start there because you want to have that as part of the culture. There's so much more that they can do when they're in-house. That being said, if you can't find somebody in-house, then bring on an advisor... Even if you bring on an advisor, some advice to founders would be you want to surround your team or at least one person that you've identified who's just a amazing world-class doer, even if they don't know growth, with a set of growth advisors so that they're learning, that's being put through the culture of the company and that knowledge stays inside of the company. So I'd say I would prefer to go internal, surround these people with great advisors and then take it from there. That would be how I approach it.

Lenny (00:34:41):
Okay. So two thoughts here. One is I feel like this podcast is becoming an interesting way to discover awesome growth advisors. I think over time I'm building this directory of who are awesome, smart growth people that are open to advising. So that could be an interesting opportunity to just look through the folks on this podcast and-

Luc Levesque (00:34:59):
Yep, there's some great people that have been on here. Definitely.

Lenny (00:35:02):
Totally working my way through all the amazing least smart growth people and product leaders. The other is I've noticed they're a lot of the best growth advisors have worked with the same sorts of companies. I find Miro comes up a lot, Canva comes up a lot, Pinterest. All these people that have worked with say Pinterest that I hear about are just awesome. Casey comes to mind, Melissa Tan who's coming out with a podcast, I think she worked with them. Dropbox. Anyway, so maybe one idea, see who these companies work with as advisors and that can maybe point you to people that are worth exploring.

Luc Levesque (00:35:34):
I mean, that's a good idea. It kind of goes back to something I mentioned earlier, which is companies that have a lot of traffic and that have a lot of users are a great learning ground for growth people and for advisors, because no matter how smart you are, you need the reps. You got to go to the growth gym and put in the reps, which is experiments. You've got to try things, things that are going to work, things that aren't going to work. There's a discipline of when something doesn't work, you can learn almost as much as when something works. But you need that traffic, you need that environment. And that's why certain companies have these great people coming out like Casey at Pinterest and other people that have been at these companies that have the traffic, have the culture to support it, to support growth. I don't think that's a coincidence why some of these companies have some great people coming from them.

Lenny (00:36:20):
The other tip I just thought about as you were talking is everyone's launching a Substack newsletter that is doing any sort of advising because there's a lot of power in building an audience and creating kind of awareness of what you do. So I wonder if another tip is search Substack's directory of newsletters for specific things you're dealing with, like say, go to PLG or sales and you might find someone there."

Luc Levesque (00:36:39):
I haven't done that, but that seems like a reasonable way to do it.

Lenny (00:36:42):
That's where we're all heading.

Luc Levesque (00:36:44):
I'm not saying that the people on Substack have this. But as advice to the people listening, is when you're vetting for a growth advisor or growth talent, don't just wait it on the public halo of somebody. That's a common mistake I've seen where maybe somebody's done presentations at a conference or somebody's done... I don't know, but their Twitter following is broad. They can be excellent. That's not a disqualifier immediately, but just make sure not to make the hire just exclusively on that. I've made that mistake a few times and it's a common one to get into. So make sure you're vetting properly, even if somebody with a large following on Substack or Twitter. That's I think an important thing to keep in mind.

Lenny (00:37:25):
1000% agree. I always say that the best product leader is the best growth. People don't have time to sit on Twitter and tweet and write newsletters. They're doing the job, working, building, growing, and maybe eventually they get out of that and start writing. But I 1000% agree, there's a lot of people-

Luc Levesque (00:37:40):
Well, not to disqualify all the people on Twitter.

Lenny (00:37:43):
Absolutely.

Luc Levesque (00:37:43):
Some of them are tweeting [inaudible 00:37:45], but my point is just don't over pivot on the halo. Just look at their past performance. What teams have they been on? What environment do they have? Do they really know growth? And sometimes they do, but I think it's a common mistake to say, "Oh yeah, they have a large following, let's hire this person." That's poorly.

Lenny (00:38:03):
1000% agree. Rarely does a celebrity hire that seems really genius on Twitter and Substack end up being as amazing as you think.

Luc Levesque (00:38:12):
Yeah, it does happen, but yeah.

Lenny (00:38:13):
It does happen. Absolutely. One last question around this topic. People listening might want to become growth advisors, I'd mentioned this earlier. Is there any other advice you want to share? Just like, "If you want to become a growth advisor someday, here's what you should think about."

Luc Levesque (00:38:26):
Yeah, I think the right mental model as a growth advisor is around the same one as an investor. So the most important thing an advisor can do aside from having impact and knowing their craft is picking which companies to work with, especially if you're working for equity. So I'll only speak to that, but you're basically putting in your time, you're picking likely a smaller number. You only have so many hours in the day of companies to work with and you want to make sure there's a likely exit in the future. So for me personally, I have a spreadsheet, like most big decisions that I make in my life. Over the years I've just added criteria and questions to ask myself about the company and then reflect on, "Okay, is this kind of checking all the boxes for a likely outcome?" Because you don't just need to be successful, you need to be successful and for the company to be successful and for there to be liquidity of that.

Luc Levesque (00:39:17):
So you need to put yourself in the shoes of an investor and look at it as an investment. That is arguably the most important thing because you can go and do a great job and then wait many years and potentially not see any reward for it. And I think that's the nice thing about the equity structure in that you're tied in the same incentives with the founder, which is just great in terms of any relationship to have the same incentives, but you want to make sure that there's a good likelihood of a decent outcome down the road.

Luc Levesque (00:39:49):
If I can throw another one in.

Lenny (00:39:49):
Yeah, absolutely.

Luc Levesque (00:39:50):
The other piece of advice I would give is it can take a long time for some of these companies to be successful. That's okay. You should expect that. In fact, you should just go in with that mindset. When I'm deciding to work with a company, I'm in there for 10 years and I know that and I say that. And I say, "I'm in. We're in this together if I choose to work with the company." But it does mean that the structure of the deal needs to reflect that. So you need to have a long tail at the end.

Luc Levesque (00:40:15):
So if you're taking options or RSUs and it's pure of the equity, make sure you have the time for that to happen. There would be nothing worse than putting your heart and soul having impact and then waiting, I don't know, a couple years and then your equity expires. So you make sure there's a long tail. I mean, it can literally take over 10 years for these companies to exit. And you should be okay with that. I think that's okay. You're taking some risks. They're taking some risk on you and that's a great partnership, but you'll just need the time for that. So advice to growth advisors, make sure to ask for a long tail so that you don't end up in a bad spot in the end. And that incentives, again, are perfectly aligned between the founder and the advisor.

Lenny (00:40:52):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is the next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage. Eppo does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding knowing prolonged analytic cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click-through metrics and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscription and payments. Eppo supports test on the front end, on the backend, email marketing, even machine learning claims. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com. That's geteppo.com and 10X your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:41:59):
So I want to segue to a different topic, SEO. You're kind of the... You tell me, but it feels like you're one of the earliest SEO people in tech. You helped grow Tripadvisor many years ago and it was mostly SEO-driven. I think you innovated a lot of SEO tactics and strategies. And then you helped Pinterest, Thumbtack, other companies that are very SEO-driven. You talked about how many companies grow through one channel and these are all very SEO-driven companies. I imagine Shopify has a lot of SEO work that's happening right now with you there. And so I want to chat about SEO. So I guess broadly SEO is like... It's like this amazing growth channel. It's basically free. It continues to work after you stop doing any work on it for a while. Many founders think about, "Should we invest in SEO? How do we approach SEO?" So maybe just as a first question, what are signs that your product and company is a good fit for SEO being potentially a huge channel for growth?

Luc Levesque (00:42:55):
Yeah, I've been doing SEO for a really long time. It's a lot of fun and certainly being a supervisor was a great learning ground for that, that we were able to really innovate and try new things there. In terms of the playbook that we built out. That was a lot of fun, those years.

Luc Levesque (00:43:11):
Couple thoughts. The first one would be I do think there's an SEO play in any company. Maybe at a different extent, but Google is such a large funnel of existing demand for your product or your product area that there's usually an angle to get some SEO traffic there. So I do think it applies to most companies. I would say if you're an early product that the world's never seen, it's a brand new thing, there might be some creation, some demand creation you need to do, but most of the time there's existing demand in Google where you can harvest demand or there's queries that are related to your topic that you can start ranking for to start building brand awareness. So there's always some angle.

Luc Levesque (00:43:52):
And then I kind of divide websites or online products into two categories. There's the ones which are smaller sites, small number of pages, very targeted at your product and don't have this kind of loop of creating new pages automatically. Most eCommerce sites actually have would a number of pages around the products and about us, those types of pages. That's one type of sites. Let's say they have dozen pages. And then there's other ones with thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions of pages which are either user generated content like Tripadvisor and Pinterest and others, or marketplaces like Thumbtack and other types of websites like that. Those are generally easier to see a huge amount of impact very quickly because there's such a large optimization surface and ideally it's growing and generating traffic automatically.

Luc Levesque (00:44:40):
I've always thought of LinkedIn as just such a great example of this where you have this viral loop where if you recall when it was just starting, everybody was getting these invites from LinkedIn. Those come and go. You get an invite, you register, you don't. That happens. But the byproduct is when people join, they create this beautiful lightning page, which is your profile that gets indexed. It's kind of like a viral loop feeding an SEO loop that continues to grow. So that's a good example of use generated content which kind of feeds on itself and grows. So there's those two categories. Going back to the first category, if you only have a small handful of pages, the way to think about that is you certainly want to optimize those pages, then you want to start creating content that speaks to your audience beyond that. So you need a content strategy, whether it's a blog or creating new parts of your site that address questions that your audience might have. But generally speaking, I think there's an SEO play in any company and there's just different tactics, strategies, and approaches to get there.

Lenny (00:45:40):
Awesome. I never thought of it that way, that there's kind of these two buckets. So the first bucket is like you don't have a ton of pages that naturally are generated as a part of your experience. And the second is you do. I guess in the second bucket I think of Reddit and Glassdoor and Quora, Tripadvisor, a great example, Pinterest. In the first bucket is the way to generate pages. Basically, it's editorially write content and have people write things for you. Is that generally the strategy?

Luc Levesque (00:46:07):
There's different ways of doing it, but a good content strategy is a kind of tried and true approach. Definitely.

Lenny (00:46:13):
And in that bucket of you don't naturally have a ton of pages, can you primarily grow through SEO? Or is SEO always going to be this minority channel and you have to find something else?

Luc Levesque (00:46:24):
No, it can be a big channel. This is also about creating content, but it's not your users creating the content. You have to go create the content and have some high quality answer to a question that's being asked on Google. I think one thing to keep in mind with SEO is entire industries are based off of single keywords. I remember when I was in the travel industry that literally companies were bought and sold based on one keyword rank. So it's not like, "Oh, it's a little bit of traffic." And I think this is a bit unintuitive with growth. A lot of people, they'll think of growth as linear or it's another channel, it's another thing. I mean, growth done right is exponential. It literally is company changing.

Luc Levesque (00:47:00):
When you're talking specifically about SEO, keep in mind the world is searching for that thing, targeted on that one keyword and likely you're clicking the number one search result. So getting that number one spot is not like, "Oh, that's a little bit of traffic." You can literally build an entire business around that first spot. So don't think that's... Well, maybe it is commonly known, I'm not sure, but it's definitely something that is non-obvious or intuitive I think to most people. And if you have an entire SEO team working on one keyword, I don't think that's crazy because a small number of keywords can define an entire industry or a business.

Lenny (00:47:37):
Is there an example of that sort of situation when keyword's building a massive company?

Luc Levesque (00:47:41):
Yeah, I mean there's a lot I'm sure. I can speak to my own company that I sold to Tripadvisor. It was called TravelPod. It was a travel blogging website where you can think WordPress, but for travel, which I started earlier. It was the first site to do that. I made the mistake of not knowing SEO or growth before I sold the company. And so that was a great learning for me. When I went in, this is a story where we're looking to acquire another site and I thought the product was pretty poor. I remember talking to the founder and thinking... He'd asked me if we'd want to acquire it, and, "The product's terrible. Why would I want to acquire that?" He's like, "Yeah, they're 10 times bigger than you." And, "What?" That was when I realized, "Okay, we've been building a great product and great engineering culture and it is important, but you really need to know this growth stuff." So that's actually the moment I shifted to, "All right, we have to really know these growth levers."

Luc Levesque (00:48:34):
In that space, the number one keyword was Travel Blog. And so owning that was a big deal and we did not own it. I think we ranked number two for a really long time. I can't remember if we got it in the end, but that's just one example where... And there was many, many travel businesses where I always loved looking at a business and trying to figure out, "What's their growth loop? How did they do that?" And it's not like, "Oh, it's a great business. It just grew." Most of the time it's price line crushed it at SEM. Facebook crushed it at a viral loop where you got tagged in a photo, you got an email and you had to go register because there's a photo of you somewhere you really want to see. Tripadvisor did a great job at SEO. In [inaudible 00:49:14], it's just one really strong channel that propelled the company forward. And in this case, it can literally come down to one keyword like we had at TravelPod.

Lenny (00:49:20):
So maybe it's a good time just to give a people a mental model of the different channels/loops that exist. So you've talked about SEO is one, paid search is one. What's the collection for people to think about? Usually as you said, one of the use is the primary source of growth for a company.

Luc Levesque (00:49:38):
Yeah, there's a variety of them. I think you have to look at where the intent is right now. It does change over time, but you have social channels like TikTok, Instagram. Influencers are a great area to engage with there. You have SEO, you have search. I think ChatGPT is another upcoming one that we might want to talk about a little bit where I do think we've never seen that kind of growth for search before and that's a platform that we have to start thinking about how do we optimize for it. Google just announced there are recent changes. They're going to be putting in an AI box at the top, the searchers also, how do you optimize in a world where it's not so much about optimizing for the platform, but teaching the AI what you do and why you're the best in the world at it. So that's another whole area that we could talk about, but that's a big channel I think that that's growing.

Luc Levesque (00:50:29):
Viral loops are always a powerful thing if you can get them to work. That's more about psychology and channel optimization, where you want people to be incentivized to share the product that you have with their friends and then to have their friends come back and register. So you can have one viral loop, you can have secondary viral loops, you can bolt viral loops on your existing products. There's different ways of doing this. And then just backing up. When I think about growth, I don't think about a specific... It's not growth equals SEO and Instagram. For me, growth equals whatever it takes to move the needle. So I get this question all the time, "How do you build a growth team? What does a growth team do?" And I say whatever it takes. That could be zero to one building a new product. It could be M&A, it could be SEO, it could be social, it could be onboarding.

Luc Levesque (00:51:15):
I think that's a better framework to look at. And then if you look at it through that lens, then partnerships easily folds into that where I've seen a lot of businesses get very big on just really clever partnerships, either strategic or broad kind of affiliate based partnerships. So there's a lot of channels. I definitely wouldn't restrict the scope of a growth team to just a small subset, but have a very wide funnel or at least strategy in terms of just test a lot of different things and go after the channels that work and pivot when it does, and then really lean into the one or two or three that really work because sometimes that's all it takes for business.

Lenny (00:51:50):
Well, you definitely nerd sniped me with the ChatGPT, so let's just spend some time there. I think this relates to just the general sense that SEO is always changing and it feels like this is an SEM I guess in this case too. And ChatGPT and Bard, I guess, is maybe the latest change. So what should we know there?

Luc Levesque (00:52:05):
Yeah, I think we're all still trying to figure it out. I was at Google IO last week or the week before. As soon as I saw the search result with the big box of AI, answers at the top, having done this for so long, I immediately knew the impact that I think is about to come. I've seen this play out in travel where Google acquired ITA and did flight search and hotel search. Generally, it's great for users and great for Google and the search engines, but makes it a little bit difficult for the publishers and the sites that are adding value to the ecosystem through being ranked in search results.

Luc Levesque (00:52:42):
So what we're about to see is basically Google, what they showed was a big box on top of the search results that answers the query directly. So if you think about that, that means that there's a lot of queries right now that users are clicking through down on the organic links and getting their answer there, which will be answered directly in the search result. We've seen this play out over the last five to 10 years where more and more answers are being shown at the top. Every time something changes, entire industries are disrupted or are changed. And I think that's going to happen again.

Luc Levesque (00:53:14):
So there's different types of keywords. There's transactional ones like e-commerce keywords with purchase intent. There's navigational ones where you're trying to get somewhere. And there's informational keywords, which is, "I have a question. I'm looking for an answer." It's pretty broad. It's a big area. I think that last category of keywords is particularly at risk. So if anybody listening to this is currently getting traffic on those, you should start thinking about what does that mean when things start changing. And I think the changes will be... We'll probably start seeing things shift to paid. You have to pay for that free traffic.

Luc Levesque (00:53:47):
The second one is there may just be a case where those keywords just don't get many clicks anymore. You might drop down to a very small number of clicks, if at all, because questions will get answered directly in the search results. So it's a big shift. We have to see how things land, but that's, I think over the next 12 to 24 months, if history repeats itself, we'll see that channel change. We've seen this play out in all the different channels. They kind of evolve generally. You can't blame the companies are doing what they have to do. ChatGPT is now 50% of my daily searches and not Google. So I think Google has to react and this is what we'll see. So from a growth perspective, definitely something to start to think about.

Lenny (00:54:25):
Super fascinating. I think about my newsletter and now Google suck it all up and just tell you all the answers. Great. Good news for me.

Luc Levesque (00:54:33):
[inaudible 00:54:34].

Lenny (00:54:39):
Yeah. Yeah. And change is great. Things don't-

Luc Levesque (00:54:41):
It's exciting. It's exciting. I'm just geeking out on growth a little bit, we haven't had a big platform change in a long time. So I'm like, "All right, cool. Let's go see what we can do here. How do you optimize this? How do you get listed if you can?" We're not sure where the placements will be, but that will be the new game.

Lenny (00:54:58):
Yeah, there's actually a lennybot.com that is a GPT bot trained on my content that there's a newsletter post about how it was all built so you could build your own. And so I think my new goal is going to have to convince people to go to lennybot.com instead of Google. Wish me luck.

Luc Levesque (00:55:15):
Hey, you got to lean into it. Yeah, we have a shop.ai, this great AI-based shopping engine. And I'll tell you, I bought so much on it. It's so good. The more you use these technologies, the more you realize how good they are. And that's something biggest coming. It's not just, "Oh yeah, there's another change." I was summarizing the Google change is to some people and originally was thinking this is the biggest change in the last 10 years. And then when I reflected on the last 10 years, I thought this is actually the biggest change since the inception of Google actually. I don't think we've seen something as profound as what's coming. And you really need to get ready for it.

Lenny (00:55:52):
Yeah, I've been using ChatGPT for helping me with interview questions actually, and once in a while there's like a really good one.

Luc Levesque (00:55:59):
Oh, that's cool.

Lenny (00:56:00):
So thank you ChatGPT, bringing me good things also. Maybe one more question along these lines around kind of connecting advisorship in SEO. Would you suggest when you're starting to think about SEO, starting to invest in SEO, you might be listening to this feeling like, "I got to think about SEO," does it make sense to bring on, say, SEO advisor like you? I know you're not available currently, but other folks like you or are an agency that is really good at this stuff or bring on someone full time? Do you have any kind of frameworks for thinking about which direction to go?

Luc Levesque (00:56:30):
It's hard for an agency or a pure advisor without internal help to do a really good job without internal talent at the center. So I would say I would start with just hire somebody internally and give them the mandate and incentivize them correctly to go and own this channel. Even if they don't know SEO, my advice would be get an engineer, get somebody who is just a relentless doer who wants to learn this and surround them with great advisors that I've just seen that work really well.

Luc Levesque (00:56:59):
There are some good agencies out there. Agencies will be working with multiple companies, so it's a little bit harder to get the same impact from an agency. It can work sometimes. But my preference is generally a last resort would be an agency. And I'd much rather have somebody who's internal who knows the business, who knows the keywords, who can have the knowledge internally inside the company permanently and help grow a team around them and have succession in place and a proper team so that you're not too dependent on this one person. But that would be my go-to. And then if you're really stuck, you can use agencies, but my default would be having somebody internal supplemented with agencies if you have to. Sorry, SEO is very specific. I mean, it's a very tight channel that knowing certain things about it can have a big impact. I think you do want people that have that experience that can bring that in from the outside to augmenting internal teams. It'll take a really long time to learn it.

Lenny (00:58:01):
Awesome. I was going to ask that. So you ideally want to find someone that's done it before that isn't just a relentless learner, but is that plus, has done SEO in the past?

Luc Levesque (00:58:08):
Oh, yeah. Ideally, you hire an amazing SEO person who can bring internal. Second would be somebody amazing who can get things done, surround them with advisors. And then in my stack rank, the third would be agencies.

Lenny (00:58:20):
Awesome. And then the other kind of common issue with SEOs, it takes a long time to show impact. Do you have just a rule of thumb of just give them this much time to see if they can make an impact?

Luc Levesque (00:58:29):
I'd say a few things. I'd say if you already have content and pages that are pretty good and getting a decent amount of traffic, it doesn't necessarily have to take a long time. So that would be my first reaction. It can take a long time. Generally, it takes a long time when you have to build new content. So the way to think about Google is it is going to take your content, it's going to show it to its users, people that are searching, and it's going to determine which piece of content is the best to ranked highly. It's not just about little tricks and links and keyword ratios. Those days are over. Those do matter, but it's not purely about that. And if you have a new piece of content, it takes time for Google to build enough trust to say, "Okay, I'm going to start showing this to users now" and then start collecting user feedback and then rank it appropriately. That can take some time.

Luc Levesque (00:59:14):
But if you have existing pages that are ranking eight and they're already on the first page, it doesn't always happen. But I've certainly seen it, in fact more common than not that you could have sometimes hundreds of percentages of lift very quickly. And it depends what you're starting with, is probably the right way to think about it. So if I'm trying to summarize it, I would say 12 months is probably max. If you can't see impact in 12 months, there's something wrong. If you have existing content, it could happen pretty early. It could happen on day one. Actually I've seen that happen. If you have to build new parts of the site, it can take months. I've seen that happen in companies I've worked with where I think it would be like a quarter, we had to wait till we saw a big lift. So it's somewhere between three to 12 months.

Lenny (01:00:05):
Awesome. That's really helpful. Okay, so final topic/final question. You've had a truly incredible career. You've worked with incredible companies, incredible leaders. I'm looking at your site here in a site window and you're like, here's a picture of you and Zuck. Here's a picture of you and Toby from Shopify, and there's more. I'm curious what you believe has been key to your success and your career success that you suggest listeners who want to have some measure of similar success do.

Luc Levesque (01:00:36):
It's probably a bunch of things we could talk about here. Yeah, this is the obvious thing is I think you've just got to love what you do. You got to work hard. You have to have impact. Certainly at the end of the day in growth, that's all that will matter. If I think back to specific things that I do though to pick one thing that's been very important for me throughout my journey is the art of self-reflection. And coaches. I've had coaches my whole career. But the macro theme is you're constantly iterating, experimenting, and becoming the best you can be in your career also as a dad and as a husband, and of course for your own personal health. But that reflection is so important. I've leveraged many, many different coaches over the years and now do a lot of self-reflection through a morning routine that I have and that I've been doing for quite some time that has been a big unlock for me.

Luc Levesque (01:01:32):
The biggest, most important part of that morning routine is dedicating an hour aside to really think about, "What's going well? What's not going well? What am I screwing up? Well, why am I screwing it up?" Which is often more important than, "What am I screwing up?" And of course, "What am I going to do about it?" But as long as you're learning and iterating every day, then you're just making constant progress towards your goals. It's something I do that I love doing. I love thinking. So I literally can just sit there and think for hours actually. I have a dashboard on all the areas that I'm focusing on with red, yellow, green, and just constantly revving on what am I working on improving, what am I doing, what experiments am I running and where am I doing well and where am I not doing well and how can I be better in all areas of my life, including being a leader. There's a lot of different things to it, but I think that's really important and something that I've learned over the years that is probably the most valuable to have as a skill.

Lenny (01:02:32):
I definitely want to spend more time on this. So you said you sit for an hour reflecting on what's going well, what's not going well. Is there more you can share about how you accomplish that, how you find time to do this for an hour?

Luc Levesque (01:02:43):
Yeah, it sounds crazy when you say it, but I do. So I wake up at 5:00. I work out. So I do cardio, I do some exercise. There's this great book called Spark, which is all around the neuroscience of exercise and I really learned a lot from that in terms of having this great morning routine that really boots you up. I kind of call it my bootloader. When I start in the day, if I go through my bootloader, I have just a much better day.

Luc Levesque (01:03:09):
So exercise, stretching, meditation, and then I do a cold plunge now. So I do a bunch of different things. But then I do some reading, but I do carve aside one hour where I go through... And this is probably important and it's where I've landed, but structured self reflections. That's why I have this dashboard. I have certain areas that I think about what's going well, what's not. I track all the experiments I'm writing. I'm just really passionate about if you're going to do something, try to do it as best as you can. This is a habit that has allowed me to sharpen my skills in certain areas.

Lenny (01:03:47):
What are some of these things you're working on? If you can share what's on this dashboard, how can people imagine what this might be?

Luc Levesque (01:03:53):
So there's a lot of personal stuff on it, but it literally is broken down between being a better friend, better husband, better dad, and then better leader. And so on the personal side, I've been known to work a lot of times. Balance is always hard to find. From being a dad and then thinking about how to be better there, I realized about six months ago that I've never actually asked for feedback on how I'm doing. So I asked my kids six months ago, I asked both of them independently, "What's one thing I can do to do more of or do less of to be a better dad?" And they were kind of caught off guard by it. My son's 15 and my other son is 12. And I said, "Take some time to think about it." And after about a month, my son came back and said, "Dad, I got one." He said, "I want to spend more time with you."

Luc Levesque (01:04:53):
So that was very helpful for me to hear. I'm big on routines and habits to make sure that things that you want to do are repeatable and it's not one-off things. So ever since that day, I've now have a daddy date if you want to call it. But every two weeks we do one-on-one time together with each of the boys. They get to pick what we do just so we have that consistent, whether it's dinner or play basketball in the front. But it's all about feedback. So that's one example on the personal side.

Lenny (01:05:27):
This reminds me of a tweet I just saw where someone said that the only people that are going to remember that you worked late for many nights is your kids.

Luc Levesque (01:05:37):
Wow. Wow. That's deep. I like that a lot.

Lenny (01:05:43):
As a soon to be parent, that's going to stick with me.

Luc Levesque (01:05:46):
Wow, I like that a lot. So it's tough, right? It's tough to balance it all out. It's very difficult because you want excel at everything you do in life. So that reflection helps, be it check-in as well of how am I doing in all these areas? And that I find the color coding is helpful for that too, of just doing a bit of a gut check and asking for that feedback.

Lenny (01:06:06):
So it also makes me think about, I was watching a Jeff Bezos interview and ask him what his morning routine was and he said that he just likes to putter around. he likes to just sit around, talk to his kids, read the newspaper. He doesn't book any meetings in the morning. He just finds he just needs a little flex time at the beginning.

Luc Levesque (01:06:22):
Totally. Before I became a dad, I read somewhere that one of the most impactful things you can do as a father is just be there for dinner every night. So I have been there for 15 years every single night. But it was a good reminder it's not enough. Having dinner is important with your family, but in our case there's more you can do. And just getting that feedback and doing some reprioritization is always important.

Lenny (01:06:46):
Speaking of dinners, and maybe just as a last question, I know you do this really interesting thing where you have dinners with interesting people. You just kind of invite them to your house. I don't know if interesting is the right way to describe it, but just kind of interesting people, prominent people. Can you just talk about what that is and what you think about and the benefits of doing something like that?

Luc Levesque (01:07:04):
I think interesting is the right way to think about it.

Lenny (01:07:05):
Okay.

Luc Levesque (01:07:07):
I started this when I was in Ottawa with a bunch of founders there. It's become one of my favorite things to do. Honestly, it's like the bright spot in my month that, I call them guilds. So the word guild is with the builders. That's how it originally started. So Guild Night is what I call it. The idea is basically all interesting people doing interesting things actually want to spend time with each other. That's why I'm actually surprised more people don't do this. But I'll basically have interesting people come, usually five or six. We'll sit around talking about specific topics. So I do one for consumer product, I do one for SEO, I do one for growth leaders and just have really smart, interesting people come and we'll talk about different topics that are relevant.

Luc Levesque (01:07:57):
Sometimes we'll pick a topic, so we'll have a group and then we'll say, "Hey, we want to talk about AI." So one of the advantages of being in the Bay Area is you can find three or four people that likely wrote some of the core code in Google or in AI, and then they'll join. People want to meet. People want to get together and have these conversations. So it's very exhilarating. I learn a ton. It's a lot of fun. I don't know why more people don't do it. And it's a bit of work to organize, but it's also just tactically been a great way to meet fascinating people. It's helped a lot for recruiting, for if you need a back channel. Now you know all these people that are in different industries. But business aside, they're very valuable business wise, but they're just a lot of fun and they've become some of my favorite things that I do.

Luc Levesque (01:08:43):
I'm really surprised why more people don't do it because I think especially now that everybody's remote and we're working from home, or most people are, it's more valued than ever. So it's something I'm looking forward to continuing and always actually through my morning reflection, thinking about what are new ones I can spin up who are interesting people that we want to break bread with. I do think it's important that it's done at your house. If anybody's thinking of starting this, you can do it at a restaurant, but there's something about being in your home or being in somebody's home, five or six people having a great conversation about a topic that's mutually interesting. I think everybody values it and it adds a lot of spice to life. I think it's really important.

Lenny (01:09:23):
Any other tactical tips for making one of these happen? So you do it at your home, you cater. How many people? How long? Anything else you want to share there?

Luc Levesque (01:09:31):
Yeah, so I think the most I've done is 10. That's a bit too much. Six seems to be perfect, six to eight, eight at the max. I do get a catered so you don't have to worry about cooking. The topic, something like a topic that it's common so that everybody can rally around. I do think it's important, like I mentioned, doing it at home. Usually we start around 6:00, we go till 9:00 or 10. It's just been a really good thing that I've learned over time is a really good thing to do to just make for a better life, frankly. Make richer life with some great friends.

Lenny (01:10:08):
And when we say cater, it's just ordering in basically, right? It's not that-

Luc Levesque (01:10:11):
Yeah, you can just DoorDash some food so you don't have to worry about cooking. I'm sure there's other things. I've never really deeply thought about it, but in terms of what are the specific things, I've evolved it over time, but I don't cook anyways, so it would be terrible if I cooked. So this is much easier to do it this way. And as long as you're inviting kind of interesting people, everybody's going to want to come and spend some time and bring some bread.

Lenny (01:10:33):
Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Luc Levesque (01:10:39):
I think so.

Lenny (01:10:40):
I think you are. Well, question one. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Luc Levesque (01:10:47):
So there's one that I've already mentioned, which is Spark. It's the neuroscience of exercise. That's a great book. It's not one of these exercise to stay fit and to live longer. This is really about, frankly, if you exercise and do it in a specific way, they have a kind of blueprint they lay out, it's good for just cognition and kind of horsepower and performance. So that's been a really important one and has been a big part of me building on my morning routine. The second one is when I picked up I think about a year ago or six months, and I recommended it, gee, I don't know, at least to a couple hundred people now because I recommended it to my team. It's called Smart Brevity. Have you heard of this one?

Lenny (01:11:31):
No, but I love the sound of it.

Luc Levesque (01:11:33):
I've always been big on writing crisply and being very tight and not having three-page memos that you're sending off. Especially now that we're remote and we're all doing slack and email and different ways of messaging, how tightly you communicate, how crisp your communication is really important for frankly you getting your point across and also for the other person who's probably digesting a hundred of these messages. So this book is... It's a book on how to do that. It breaks down how to write crisply and the different parts of it. I've definitely seen improvements in the team since I've passed around. So that's a great book frankly for anybody, work or personal because we're writing so much and communication is so key. So that's the second one. The third one is a golden oldie. It's one that I've read many, many times and I recommend from a growth perspective. This one youlikely heard of, it's Influence by Cialdini.

Lenny (01:12:28):
I got it back on my bookshelf there.

Luc Levesque (01:12:30):
Yeah, it's a great book, and it's because it's really the underpinning of so many different product and growth principles that you can apply. So that's just a classic that is good to reread at least once a year. So those are three books.

Lenny (01:12:42):
I'm going to extend this a little bit. I'm going to add two books that are building on your two books, or the first two books, I guess. One is Peter Attia just wrote a book called Outlive. That is-

Luc Levesque (01:12:50):
I've got to read it.

Lenny (01:12:51):
Okay. And it's exactly the same kind of premise of just how important exercise is. I think there's a quote in there of just the only thing proven to help you live longer is exercise. And then Smart Brevity, there's another book that I'd recommend if people want more on though on this topic called Nobody Wants to Read Your Shit.

Luc Levesque (01:13:07):
[inaudible 01:13:08].

Lenny (01:13:08):
And it's by the guy that wrote the War of Art and Bagger Vance. I forget his name off the top of my head, but it's like, "Nobody wants to read your shit. Here's what you need to do for people to want to read anything you're writing."

Luc Levesque (01:13:23):
Yeah. We want to scan. We want to read. Yeah, that's great. I'll pick that one up. Nobody Wants to Read Your Shit.

Lenny (01:13:27):
Exactly. What a title.

Luc Levesque (01:13:29):
That's a great title.

Lenny (01:13:31):
All right, back on track. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Luc Levesque (01:13:36):
I don't watch TV much and I haven't really watched any movies in a while. But I do watch a lot of podcasts on YouTube. Andrew Huberman has got, of course, a great series. I've watched I think everyone he puts out, so I don't know if that counts, but that's-

Lenny (01:13:49):
Absolutely

Luc Levesque (01:13:50):
Okay. So I watched that. And then of course the All-In Podcast is always fun, so I make sure to watch those when they come out as well. A lot of fun and informative. So those are my two, I would say.

Lenny (01:14:01):
Great picks. What is a favorite interview question that you like to ask?

Luc Levesque (01:14:06):
Teach me something about growth that I don't already know. Because... and you could apply this to engineering product, any other area, because it really gives you a sense of what this person thinks is the top of the stack in terms of the smartest thing they know. Whether you know it or not is irrelevant. But sometimes you actually do end up learning some stuff. But it's my favorite question because you can really engage in a conversation around, "Okay, the thing you think is so unique that maybe you've come up with this learning yourself or you've created this tactic and then it gives you a sense of how much they know the craft." So that's my favorite question.

Lenny (01:14:42):
What is a favorite product that you've recently discovered that you just really love?

Luc Levesque (01:14:46):
I've got a cold plunge that I bought that I love. So it's called the Renew Cold Plunge. It's cold but super convenient and I do that every morning and I just love it.

Lenny (01:14:58):
Any advice for cold plunging? That sounds very painful and hard.

Luc Levesque (01:15:01):
I usually start going... I go in a hot tub to warm up, then I go in the cold plunges and back in the hot tub. That's an easy way to get started. But I will say I jumped in yesterday and today without going to hot tub. It was very painful, but I felt so much better after. So I might be changing up my approach, but I'm just kind of experimenting with different things. But that would be some advice. And then just go slow. Start it not too cold, and then slowly make it cold over time. But I think it's a pretty good thing to add in so far.

Lenny (01:15:31):
How long have you spent in the cold plunge?

Luc Levesque (01:15:33):
It varies. Right now I'm doing five minutes. Five minutes at, I think it's 53 degrees. So I've started at 60, slowly bringing it down. But you do have to go slow because I brought it down even further and kind of caught me off guard and got a little dizzy. So you got to find your sweet spot.

Lenny (01:15:53):
Damn. Very Huberman inspired. I imagine this-

Luc Levesque (01:15:57):
Definitely it was part of the source there.

Lenny (01:15:59):
I know people would hear a lot about cold plunges. I guess what have you seen as a benefit just while we're on this topic for people to seriously consider doing this?

Luc Levesque (01:16:06):
So a couple things. Mood afterwards is so much better. You get this great multi-hour boost from doing it. Especially like I mentioned, not doing warm before or waiting 10 minutes and waiting 10 minutes after before you warm up, after you get out, great mood boost. It also helps a lot with sleep. So if you do it at night, which is a little bit difficult, it helps a lot with sleep. Those are probably the two biggest things. And you do get to a point, I'm there now where I kind of look forward to it because you know how good you'll feel afterwards. So when I'm thinking about it, I know it's painful, it doesn't make it easier, but I do look forward to it now. It's a pretty cool thing.

Lenny (01:16:44):
Oh man. I got to get one now.

Luc Levesque (01:16:46):
Yeah. [inaudible 01:16:49].

Lenny (01:16:49):
Okay, two more questions. What's something relatively minor that you've changed in your product development process that has had a big impact on your team's ability to execute?

Luc Levesque (01:16:56):
One change that comes to mind is it's common to hear discussion around you need to experiment, you need to have rigor, you need to look at results, iterate based on those results. That's pretty much common knowledge is how all good companies that execute growth that do it. I think the subtlety is that experiments are great, but they can be slow. You have to look at the results. You have to analyze how things went. You have to learn what's going on. You have to build the experiment. So there's a cost to an experiment and not everything needs to be experimented. And that's not something that I generally hear growth teams talk about. It's usually, "Hey, we need to experiment."

Luc Levesque (01:17:40):
So one thing that we're definitely focused more on lately is this idea of sometimes you just need to YOLO it because it's a better product experience or you just kind of know it's going to work. And if you're YOLO-ing 40 things and three of them work and you can look at pre-post, you can look at holdouts, there's ways of making sure you don't cause major damage, but the speed can outweigh the cost and time it takes to do experiment. So that's one change we've recently implemented. That's been pretty impactful.

Lenny (01:18:09):
Final question. So we met actually a long time ago in Montreal, or maybe it was in Ottawa, in Canada somewhere. I think it was through an organization called C100 when I was starting my company back in the day. And so my question is, what is your favorite Canadian food?

Luc Levesque (01:18:24):
It's funny. My favorite Canadian food, I'm from Ottawa and there's a lot of shawarma, Lebanese shawarma everywhere. I know it's not traditionally Canadian, but Canada's so multicultural, so I'll make this count. I love a good shawarma and it's so hard to find a good shawarma in the Bay Area. We've still been looking here. But my favorite Canadian food or pseudo Canadian is shawarma. If I had to pick one purely Canadian food, and this is related to Montreal where we first met, it's got to be a Montreal smoked meat sandwich.

Lenny (01:18:58):
Excellent choices. You're making me very hungry. I'm going to go get some shawarma, buy me a cold plunge. Luc, this was amazing. We talked through everything I was hoping to talk through. Advisorships, SEO, hiring, building habits, cold plunges. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Luc Levesque (01:19:18):
You can find me online at luclevesque.com. So first name, last name.com. And how can they be useful to me? Listen, we're always looking to hire the best of the best. So if you want to work at an amazing company with an amazing team doing very impactful work and learn the craft of growth, please reach out. We're always looking to bring on amazing talent. So that would be the woodway.

Lenny (01:19:40):
Awesome. Luc, thank you again so much for being here.

Luc Levesque (01:19:43):
Thanks. It's great to chat.

Lenny (01:19:45):
Bye everyone.

Lenny (01:19:48):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Melissa Tan (00:00:00):
My aha moment of the value of first principles thinking was when I was at Dropbox. We would hire a ton of really smart people that had never done sales and had them do sales. There are a lot of disadvantages to that, but I do think it led to a ton of innovation. That's how we got our very innovative go-to market motions because a lot of those people then moved into different functions at the company. They had all this context on who the user was. They had talked to so many different users at that point. If you take people that are just super smart, they've never done it before, one advantage of that is they can innovate because I think they come in with, I don't know anything. Let me just figure this out.

Lenny (00:00:38):
Welcome to Lenny's podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Melissa Tan. Melissa was the longtime head of growth for Dropbox's B2B business. She's also their first growth product manager. Then she went on to do full-time advising for companies like Canva, Grammarly, Miro, and Ro, helping them with their growth strategy and helping them build their growth teams.

(00:01:03):
For the past two and a half years, she's been leading growth at Webflow. But hot off the presses as Melissa shares at the top of this podcast, she's going back to full-time advising life. So if you're looking for help with go-to market plans, growth strategy, building your growth team, aligning your sales, marketing and growth efforts, she's about to become available, so definitely reach out. In our conversation, we get deep into what it takes to build a high performing team and also how to build a high performing growth team, specifically.

(00:01:30):
Melissa shares advice for becoming a leader that people will follow from company to company, how to best develop your people to become the best versions of themselves. She talks about the most common ingredients of a high performing team and what she's learned from working with companies like Canva, Grammarly, Miro, Ro, Webflow and Dropbox. We also get into how to interview product managers and she shares her actual interview process, plus who your first growth hire should probably be, the most common mistakes people make when they first start to invest in growth and a real talk story of what Dropbox did right and what they did wrong in their shift to B2B. There are so many golden nuggets of lessons in this episode and I'm excited to bring it to you. With that, I bring you Melissa Tan after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:14):
Today's episode is brought to you by AssemblyAI. If you're looking to build AI powered features in your audio and video products, then you need to know about AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to transcribe and understand speech at scale. What I love about AssemblyAI is you can use their simple API to access the latest AI breakthroughs from top tier research labs, product team that startups and enterprises are using AssemblyAI to automatically transcribe and summarize phone calls and virtual meetings, detect topics in podcasts, pinpoint when sensitive content is spoken and lots more.

(00:02:47):
All of AssemblyAI's models, which are accessed through their API are production ready. So many PMs I know are considering or already building with AI and AssemblyAI is the fastest way to build with AI for audio use cases. Now's the time to check out AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to bring the highest accuracy transcription plus valuable insights to your customers. Just like Spotify, CallRail and writer do for theirs. Visit AssemblyAI.com/lenny to try their API for free and start testing their models with their no code playground. That's AssemblyAI.com/lenny.

(00:03:23):
This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel. Get deep insights into what your users are doing at every stage of the funnel at a fair price that scales as you grow. Mixpanel gives you quick answers about your users from awareness to acquisition through retention, and by capturing website activity, ad data, and multi-touch attribution right in Mixpanel, you can improve every aspect of the full user funnel. Powered by first party behavioral data instead of third party cookies, Mixpanel's built to be more powerful and easier to use than Google Analytics. Explore plans for teams of every size and see what Mixpanel can do for you at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny. And while you're at it, they're also hiring. So check it out at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny.

(00:04:12):
Melissa, welcome to the podcast.

Melissa Tan (00:04:14):
Thanks, Lenny. It's great to be here.

Lenny (00:04:16):
I'm excited to have you on. I hear there's a big development in your career that is going to be out by the time this podcast comes out where you're embarking on a new adventure. I'd love to hear more about it and for folks to understand what you're doing next.

Melissa Tan (00:04:30):
Over the last couple years I've been at Webflow building out the growth team there. I'm actually transitioning right now and I'm out right now and I'm going to go back into advising, which is something I was doing a lot of before Webflow working, having been fortunate enough to work with great companies like Canva, Grammarly, Miro, et cetera. And so that's one of my biggest passions is working with earlier stage companies once they found product market fit and helping them scale growth. And I'll be going back into advising.

Lenny (00:04:59):
Amazing. That's a huge news because I, there's like a small number of people like Melissa that is available at certain times to work with and this is going to be this window and I just want people to understand what kinds of areas do you think you're going to focus on for folks that may need help and may want to reach out?

Melissa Tan (00:05:17):
I've worked with companies across many different stages, so even in the early stage as companies are thinking about their go-to market strategy. Previously at Dropbox, I worked across sales. I also helped start their initial product growth and self-serve team for Dropbox business. I've also overseen pricing and packaging at Webflow. So a lot of companies initially as they're thinking about their go-to market strategy, should they be product led? Should they lean more into sales motion? What should the pricing and packaging look like? I've worked with earlier stage companies and then also post product market fit as companies are building out growth and they want to make sure to optimize the funnel across activation, monetization, engagement retention. I've also advised and helped growth teams, so kind of across stages focus on growth and go-to market.

Lenny (00:06:03):
I guess while we're on it, what's the best way to reach out as people are listening to this and they're like, "Oh my God, I want to get some help on this stuff."

Melissa Tan (00:06:09):
Definitely LinkedIn is a good place. I check my LinkedIn, so feel free to reach out there.

Lenny (00:06:15):
Great. So usually we got that covered at the end, but I think that was going to be helpful in case people were like, "Oh, I see what you can help us with." So building on that, I want to focus our conversation on two specific topics that I know that you're specially strong at. One is building high performance teams broadly, and then two is building high performance growth teams specifically. How does that sound as a focus of our conversation?

Melissa Tan (00:06:41):
Yeah, let's do it. Two topics I'm very passionate about. Let's do it.

Lenny (00:06:45):
So before we get into it too deeply, I want to first talk about Dropbox. So you're at Dropbox for four-ish years, something like that, doing a lot of their growth work and it was in the middle of a lot of their growth spurts and things like that. And when I think Dropbox and growth, there's kind of this dichotomy I think about. On the one hand, there's just these incredible growth loops that work, this referral program, this crazy word of mouth. There's just this explosive growth story of a product.

(00:07:11):
And then on the other hand, there's this B2B side that from an outsider just feels like that's something that didn't work for a long time. And then Box came around and did that really well, and I think Dropbox has done better since then, but it feels like this combination of really successful growth and then maybe less successful. So I'm curious, just looking back from your experience and from what you've heard, what do you think Dropbox did and what do you think they did wrong? And then just what are some learnings from that experience and watching Dropbox go through that?

Melissa Tan (00:07:40):
Yeah, it's a great question. And having been at Dropbox for close to five years, I did a lot of reflection while I was there. So I was there from 2013 to 2017, around 200 people. I think about a billion dollar valuation to essentially ... I think when I left we were 1,500 people and we're valued at 10 billion at the IPO. I think the things that Dropbox got right, one of them was definitely hiring. So when I think about 2013, Dropbox was actually known in the tech circles as a place that was very selective, very difficult to get into. You could have an amazing resume, and Dropbox was really selective about the type of people they brought in. So I think they looked for two main things. They looked for first principles thinkers, so not necessarily your experience, but how do you approach problems, how do you know the right questions to ask? And then create your own framework around that.

(00:08:32):
Dropbox also hired for people that were just really humble, collaborative and team oriented. And the combination of those two things, people that were just first principle thinkers also just really collaborative to tons of innovation. And so when you think about freemium product led growth, even we created a high velocity sales motion there, there was just so much innovation because you had these folks that just knew how to solve problems and worked really well cross-functionally across product growth, sales, et cetera.

(00:09:04):
And also, broadly speaking, the company just infused the topic of hiring and recruiting into the culture. It was something that as I was there, everyone knew we were all going to be spending a ton of time interviewing. We all were trained on how to sell Dropbox and how to sell the roles we were recruiting for too so that we could close top talent. So I think that's something we definitely got and I learned a ton about. The other thing was the importance of execution.

(00:09:28):
So a lot of times at Dropbox we would try something and it didn't work the first time around and it was easy to be maybe say that just doesn't work for us, like growth. We actually had tried to do some growth experiments back in 2013 and they didn't find much traction, but what we found is the devil, I like to say the devils and the details and the devils and how you execute. And so coming back to how do we execute just a little bit differently and some of the learnings there where I think the first time we started growth, we could have been more user-centric and been a lot more hypothesis driven. We were following a lot of best practices that just didn't really apply to Dropbox.

(00:10:04):
And so the way that you execute ends up really mattering. That was the second learning. The third is just focus. I think you alluded to this, I think the blessing and the curse of early success is that you can get pulled in so many different directions and Dropbox had a consumer business, a B2B business, and I think we could have clarified what is our point of view on what the overall motion should look like, how do we blend and think about the journey from consumer to B2B really early on, and I think a learning was that we just started our sales motion and our enterprise a little bit later than we should have and a lot of competition caught up to us.

(00:10:44):
And then finally, I think the fourth one that I really believe in is how do you engage the whole company in thinking about go-to-market growth and revenue. Back in 2013, in tech growth was kind of like this dirty word and revenue was a dirty word, and so we were like, "Oh, a good product should sell itself. And it wasn't until our self-serve business started to slow down that we started our team because we realized there's a ton of opportunity in just optimizing the experience.

(00:11:10):
And because we started a bit later, it always felt like growth was a layer on top of product. I think the best way to execute is just to have that be front and center from the start. What is our go-to market strategy? How are we thinking about monetization and having that infused into how you think about product development? And that's something both JZ who leads product at Webflow and myself been really intentional as we've thought of the collaboration across product and growth. So that was definitely a learning. So I guess the four things there are just the importance of hiring, execution. Think about your go-to market early on and then how do you engage the whole company on thinking about go-to market and growth.

Lenny (00:11:50):
You said Dropbox essentially there was a late investment in sales and there's a sense maybe product led growth's going to take us really far. And I imagine look at Jira and Atlassian, they're just all product led and that's amazing. I guess what's your current framework for when it makes sense to start leaning into sales and hiring a sales team for say a product led product that is working?

Melissa Tan (00:12:12):
It really comes down to the product because initially I think most companies are leaning heavier into sales or heavier into product-led. You're usually not doing both at the same time. And so a trend I've seen is starting product-led first and the signal is that is a good motion for you is if the product is really intuitive to onboard onto. There's a low learning curve so you don't need a human to onboard the user. Also, if there's a viral component to it, that is really what can take.

(00:12:43):
Dropbox is massively viral. When I think also about Miro or Figma, those also are very viral products. Those have a kind of the DNA of product led. And initially I think when you have scale, you're getting a lot of signal on what is resonating with the user. Initially, you also don't have ... It takes a while to build out the features for enterprise. And so as you're building out the product-led motion, you have probably larger companies in your self-serve base and they are often knocking on your door.

(00:13:15):
This happened at Dropbox being like, "I need you to build SSO for me. I need you to build all these enterprise grade features. It's not secure enough." And so you are also collecting the list of things you need to build on the enterprise side. And so I think it's typically looking like you might start product-led, then go enterprise. And then the other direction I've seen is some companies initially are just more conducive to an enterprise in sales motion. Potentially, you need to build custom things for these users. It's also not a bottom-up motion. Maybe the way you sell the product starts with the legal team or the finance team or some important stakeholder, but then a lot of companies now are trying to make that shift to make the product more accessible and go product led.

(00:13:56):
And so then you're thinking about, okay, how do I make this product simpler to onboard onto? How do I think about reaching the end user at scale? And so I think it's basically first figuring out where do you start and then starting to invest in the area. And I guess maybe lastly, knowing how the whole picture fits together. There's a lot of companies that do consumer and B2B and I think the earlier you can figure out how they go together and what the paths and journeys look like, it just ends up being more seamless to the user and, yeah.

Lenny (00:14:30):
Awesome. Okay, so let me start to transition into talking about building awesome teams and high performing teams. And something that I know about you that I've heard from other people is that you have this reputation for being a person that people follow from company to company, which is the ultimate sign of, I don't know, retention and NPS and product market fit as a leader and a manager. So I'm just curious, what is it that you think you do that gets people to follow you from company to company?

Melissa Tan (00:14:57):
I've been really fortunate. I've worked with a few folks from my early Dropbox team that I've known for 10 years now, like a couple of times. In some case, three times. And I always feel so privileged that I get the opportunity to work with them again and they have that trust and confidence in me. I think what it is, and it took me time to develop this, is I have a very people focused approach to how I lead and manage. I really think the core of it is deeply caring about people, building that trust, investing in their career development, helping them figure out where they want to go in their career. I think for me it's very personal. I have been really fortunate to have great mentors and managers that helped me in those respects. And so it really started from just paying it forward and wanting to do the same thing for other people that were on my team. I think it just comes down to deeply caring and everything, all your actions follow through from there. So that's how I would describe that.

Lenny (00:15:55):
Some people may be hearing that and feel like there's this choice you have to make as a leader deeply care about the person or drive impact, focus on getting the work done. Do you find that those can coexist or is it this kind of two ends of a spectrum and maybe the question's just like how do you do both? How do you help people yes, achieve and drive impact while also feeling like you really care about them?

Melissa Tan (00:16:15):
I don't think that they're mutually exclusive of each other because I think the other thing that I really emphasize on my team is being very results oriented. So as a growth leader, for better or for worse, everything you do is very measurable. And so I actually think this is why a lot of folks on my team, something that they actually appreciate is knowing what success looks like and knowing how they'll be measured. And I actually create a very results-oriented culture on the team where it's clear what our goals are, we break it down into the individual levers, it's clear how success is measured for each individual.

(00:16:54):
And so I don't think they are mutually exclusive. And then my role as a leader is also supporting their career growth, helping them meet those goals and giving them feedback along the way. So even though they might sound like two different things, I actually think they can coexist and for me, I actually really lean into both.

Lenny (00:17:15):
What's an example of caring deeply about someone and being that kind of leader? People may be listening and are like, "Oh yeah, I care a lot about my reports." But what are some examples of what that means to you that maybe would surprise people?

Melissa Tan (00:17:27):
I think an example from someone that they joined my team and I just early on thought that they weren't maybe moving quickly enough and they needed some more direction. And so really early into them joining the company, that was about two or three weeks in, I actually pulled them aside and I said, "Hey, we need to move a lot faster. This is where we need to get to by X. We're a growth team. We need to prove wins out early. This is how I think we should do it. Let's try to create a roadmap, a list of problems to solve, et cetera, hypotheses." And they don't have to be right, but just getting something out there, starting to line the whole team on what those are and then defining how we're going to measure success and know we're in the right path. We just need to get there as quickly as we can.

(00:18:14):
And so I gave them that feedback and afterwards, ever since then they have been just on a tear and they actually have mentioned that in later conversations a year into working together that they were so grateful that I had that conversation with them and that I took the time to tell them those things. I think sometimes as a manager it can maybe, you want to avoid the uncomfortable conversations, but I actually think the more direct you can be but also saying this is my intention. My intention is to set you up for success. That goes really far and I think that's a great example of how do you deeply care about somebody and give them direct feedback and you're giving them direct feedback because you deeply care and you also believe that they can do things differently. I think the only reason you would give that feedback is because they can do things differently and you just want to help support them.

Lenny (00:19:10):
In that conversation. What is it that you did that made them feel like you really cared about them? Because when I hear you describe it's like you're just telling them, you're giving them feedback just like, "Hey, you need to do a lot better at this. We need to actually hit our goals." What was it that made them feel like, "Oh, she really wants me to succeed?"

Melissa Tan (00:19:22):
I think in that conversation what's important is also saying, "I believe you can do all these things and I'm doing this to support you." Or, "I'm sharing this feedback because I believe in you." Also saying that I'm here as support, as you are building that out, let me know what I can do to support you. We can jam on it together if it's helpful. Basically, I guess boil it down to one, restating your intention and why you are having that conversation to sharing that you are there to support them and offering your own help as well.

(00:19:59):
Those I think are the things that go along well. And I think the third thing is as you give someone feedback, it should never sound like finger pointing or criticizing. It's really just, "Hey, this is what I observed, this is the impact that it had and here is a different way." And so keeping the feedback really about the work itself and the specific things that you think can be improved.

Lenny (00:20:28):
I know you're also a big fan of developing talent internally versus hiring experts from the outside and it's always this decision I think as a leader and as a company. How much do you invest in developing people knowing they can leave anytime, knowing that that's going to take all this time and work? What have you found from and just learned about the advantages maybe of spending time in developing people and helping them progress and just why is that something you find really important?

Melissa Tan (00:20:55):
I'll start with the why behind developing people. For me personally, it comes from like I'm personally passionate about it just because I feel that a lot of folks invested in me personally when I started out in the working world, I actually struggled quite a lot. I think making the transition from school where it's really clear what success looks like, you're just studying, getting good grades. To work where things are much more ambiguous was a really big transition for me and I really benefited from so many mentors that invested in me that I kept in touch with over the years that have also just helped me with my careers.

(00:21:30):
Two that really stand out are from Dropbox, Oliver Jay who goes by OJ and GC Lionetti. So it really has come from a very personal place for me. Secondly, I think it's just makes a lot of sense as you're scaling a company that as you are growing, it just is a smoother transition that the folks on your team can grow with you. People will build institutional knowledge and people talk a lot about founder intuition and that intuition that founders just have. I actually think that extends to early employees too, that have built a ton of context on the user on how to get things done at the company. So the more that you develop talent within the company, the smoother transition is versus bringing someone from the outside where there's just a lot of different factors and there's risk there. And so it really comes from a personal place, but also it makes a lot of sense from just like de-risking the situation as you're scaling.

Lenny (00:22:27):
In my personal career I had the biggest inflection point and the most progress I made as a product manager was one manager who just did exactly what you're describing, where you invested really deeply in helping me become a better PM and it was not easy. It was just very critical of all the things I wasn't doing perfectly. And I always think about people don't sometimes have someone like that in their career. They don't have a manager like Melissa. Do you have any advice for people that are looking for someone like that or they're just like, "Man, I have no one around me that's really helping me develop?" What do you suggest they do?

Melissa Tan (00:22:58):
As you are looking for a job, I actually do think you should look to work with people that have that reputation and that you can see that interest that they enjoy mentoring people. They have a track record of developing people. Maybe they have brought other people they've worked with at the company from other companies. Those are good signals that that's something that that person cares about. And even in the interview process, kind of interviewing your manager too and understanding what is their management philosophy, how do they think about your career path in that role? Those are things I would look for.

(00:23:32):
The second thing too is as you're interviewing, looking for a manager who especially your success will be tied to their success, this is actually what happened. I mean it's not like you need to be super strategic about that, but when I reflect back at times when I got closest to people was when I was one of the most critical people on their team and they really needed me to be successful and so they also just would spend a ton more time with me.

(00:23:58):
So really looking for those opportunities and being really selective in the types of roles you're taking. I also think there have been times for me personally where I've built relationships with someone that wasn't my direct manager that worked at the same company. And this actually has happened a lot at other companies I've worked with where someone knows that it's a passion of mine to mentor people. And so they proactively reach out to me, ask me for advice, ask me, "Hey, can we set up a monthly recurring sync?"

(00:24:25):
And so I also think you can look for other people at the company that you work with. And then finally the other thing is looking for external advisors. I actually, in my advising end up mentoring a lot of the people that I work with too. It just organically ends up happening. And so I would say summarize that as just look for the people that you think have this passion, build that relationship with them. And ideally I think you actually build the strongest when you are working together. You just learn so much about each other, but if you don't have that set up, I think there's other ways to just proactively look for mentorship and guidance.

Lenny (00:25:00):
Any tips on the questions? Maybe to ask a manager to help them get to this, if any come to mind and also when you're looking for someone to help you, anything specific you think that people should look for that maybe they may not be thinking about?

Melissa Tan (00:25:13):
On the questions to ask when you're interviewing for a role, I would actually ask things like I'd love to get a sense for how you think about ... I mean I think you can flat out ask, I'd like to get a sense of how you think about managing folks on your team, how you think about developing talent on your team and seeing what their responses to that. I would also ask how are you thinking about the career path for this role? And if the person has not thought about it at all or doesn't ask you, "Well, what is important to you?" I think those are some signals that it's maybe not where this person tends to spend their time thinking. And then I would also ask other people on the panel that are not going to be your manager but that work with this person, especially if you happen to talk to people that they manage, how is this person as a manager? And that ends up being also very insightful.

(00:26:08):
The questions I would ask if you're looking for someone external, I always find that that relationship is best the more organic it could be. I think Cheryl Sandberg had wrote this in her book Lean She basically writes about how some people will go, "Will you be my mentor?" And I've got that question too, and it's just a lot of pressure to get asked that question really early in and you don't really know the person. And so the more it can be organic where you talk to somebody, you have actual advice that you want, some people will just reach out to me that I haven't worked with in a long time and like, "Hey, I'm thinking about a career decision or I'm in this tricky situation at work, can we talk?" And I just give them advice and they will reach out to me for advice occasionally.

(00:26:57):
It doesn't have to be a recurring thing that you have to just nurture that relationship. I think that is a way to do it. Or if you are working with somebody and you want to set up some type of monthly thing, I think you asked for that as well. The only thing is I would just be respectful of the time. So if you don't have anything to talk about that month or anything like that, I'm just always willing to help people. It doesn't mean we have to be frequently in touch. And so I think it's also less about being frequently in touch and it's just going and reaching out when you actually have a problem. People that want to help others are just going to, if they have the time, they'll say yes.

Lenny (00:27:30):
Tim Ferriss talks about that too. He is like, "Never ask someone to be your mentor." As you said, that's a scary proposition. You're committing to something, it's pressure versus just like, "Hey, can we just meet and can I just get some advice? And then maybe after you do that, can we meet next month also?" And just help it grow organically.

Melissa Tan (00:27:48):
Yeah, definitely.

Lenny (00:27:50):
I want to talk about how you develop talent and what you've learned there. But before that, I wanted to zoom out maybe first and talk about ingredients of high performance teams. So before I ask that question, can you just list the companies you work with, some of the companies you've worked with?

Melissa Tan (00:28:03):
I guess I've mentioned Dropbox. So Dropbox was my first high growth tech startup. And then after Dropbox I did a lot of advising. So I got to work with Typeform in Barcelona and then someone at Typeform introduced me to Canva. So I met Canva when they were still about 200 people in their early growth journey. Have worked with Grammarly, Miro and then I joined Webflow. And so have been fortunate to be part of a ton of, I guess what I would think are high performing teams.

Lenny (00:28:33):
100%. That's an incredible roster. So here's the question. What are some of the most common ingredients you've seen across these teams, which from an outsider's perspective seem quite high performing?

Melissa Tan (00:28:46):
I think it first starts with the team having a really clear goals. They need to know what success looks like. And often I think that's for growth teams in particular, it's always really clear, "Hey, we need to hit certain metrics. We have certain goals for the quarter and for the year." And then also having a mission. So the mission's all about the why, right? So an example at Webflow is we have our growth team gold on ultimately the North Star is ARR, Annual Recurring Revenue. And then you break it down into the levers that drive ARR, the leading indicator, so that could be activation rates, the number of customers you bring in, et cetera. And so each team has really clear goals. And then we have our mission. The why. Our mission, the why we do it is we want to build these delightful experiences for our users. We want to support them on their journey on the product.

(00:29:35):
And the reason why the what is monetization is that's just a good signal that people find your product valuable, especially if they're consistently paying you and they're retaining. And then the other thing that I think is important is culture. So how are you going to do these things? When thinking about culture, obviously it depends on the function and the culture you want to set there. For me personally, the type of culture I try to set for the team is one around being really results oriented.

(00:30:03):
So something that someone on my team was saying the other day is you always make it really clear that we're going to be measured on impact and that's like how we are ultimately measured as a team. And so really creating that results oriented team. Also, a team that's very team first and collaborative. I think when you have very clear goals, when it's very results-oriented, you could potentially be in a situation where people feel they're competing against each other and you just don't want that. You actually want folks on the team to help each other out to share learnings.

(00:30:33):
I think that's what ends up being like a situation where one plus one equals three. You're not locally optimizing but you're thinking broader about the team and thinking beyond yourself. The third thing is really this ownership mentality. Something I directly saw at Dropbox is when we were a smaller company, everyone just felt a lot more ownership in accountability because there's just nobody else. You're wearing five different hats. You have to do it.

(00:30:57):
As you scale, it's really easy to suddenly feel like that ownership is diluted. And so something I always try to keep in the team, it's a feeling that we're owners and that really proactive mindset of how am I going to solve this problem? I'm blocked by this team, what am I going to do about it? And just being people that have strong sense of agency. And then lastly having fun. I think that especially in high pressured environments, easy to get stressed and all that stuff. And at the end of the day, this is very personal me, but the more fun you can have, the better everything is. And so just making sure you're infusing fun along the way and you're not taking things too seriously.

Lenny (00:31:38):
So I was taking notes as you were talking and there's kind of these four items just to summarize. One is creating a culture of impact and performance. Two is being team first and making about the team versus the person. Three is creating a sense of ownership and making people feel like they're owners and then having fun, which I love. A question I have there is say within the ownership bucket of creating a sense of ownership, what do you actually do to create that sense amongst the team?

Melissa Tan (00:32:04):
I think it first starts with defining the scope that everyone is going to own and drive. So as you are setting up the team, it's important that each person on the team has scope that they can run independently and that they are excited to own and drive. So one example here is as I was leaving Dropbox, the finance team looked at our metrics and saw that each growth PM was bringing over a million in AR per year just from all the experiments.

Lenny (00:32:31):
Holy moly.

Melissa Tan (00:32:31):
Yeah. And so that's quite a lot of impact. And being a finance team, they said logically we should just double the team. If each person brings in more than a million, if we want to double the AR, let's just double the team. And so I actually pushed back significantly though. I thought to myself, "If we double the team, what is everyone on the team going to own and drive? Is it like we split up different parts of the website, different parts of the product 1:00 PM owns just like the checkout flow.

(00:32:57):
I didn't think that was going to be interesting enough for the team and going to help us recruit people that were excited to solve such small parts of the growth problem. And so really thinking about how do you carve out scope and if you are a growth team, maybe thinking about splitting up by problems to solve that are really meaty by areas of the funnel like activation, monetization, et cetera. So first starting out with carving out good scope. And then the second thing is just infusing a culture of thinking like an owner. This infusing of the culture, I think it comes out in a few ways. One is, and this is really common in growth. Growth is so cross-functional that you often will end up feeling like you're blocked by other teams.

(00:33:38):
Let's say we want to run an experiment on this part of the product, maybe it's a core PM that kind of owns that service area that doesn't want to drive that thing or let's say or blocked by a bottleneck on designer engineering. It's something where I think if you're thinking an owner, you are not feeling easily disempowered because you can't do something and instead you're thinking, "What is everything I can do and did I exhaust all the options?"

(00:34:05):
And then finally it's leading by example. I try to also show to my team that I'm always thinking like an owner and then I'm always trying to do everything I can. And finally as a leader, thinking like an owner also means taking responsibility for your team. And so if things don't go right in my team, I'm the first one to say that ultimately I'm responsible and it's a failure or oversight on my side. And so that is what I think an ownership mentality is. It's just really thinking about the scope, creating that culture and then as a leader it's just seeing yourself as ultimately being accountable.

Lenny (00:34:37):
Awesome. And this connects to something else I wanted to pull the thread on, which is the team first bucket. I think about Meta, not to throw them under the bus or anything, but I feel like everyone I know at Meta their performance review is very tied to their impact. It's very impact driven and that leads to people needing to drive impact themselves. I drove this impact and they look at how much did you contribute to that impact versus other people on your team. And it creates some challenges I think for people. How do you create that feeling of team first, even though your performance as you talked about is so tied to here's your success metric, here's what success means for you, for the team, how do you make it feel team first versus like, I need to do this myself?

Melissa Tan (00:35:17):
There's definitely a delicate balance here. It comes down to the way that I think the manager leads the team and sets the tone. And so for me, I always make it clear that even though results are important, it's a team sport. And so I often find that I am encouraging the team to work together. So again, as a leader, you have context in everything happening. So sometimes I know 1:00 PM is working on something or even a PM outside our team is working on something and I try to actually fill in context if I think someone on my team could contribute. And I encourage that action even though it doesn't maybe feed into impact on the thing they're driving. So it really comes down to the culture that you set and what you encourage the team to do. I also think the more that you can see that you actually benefit from helping each other out, the better it is.

(00:36:15):
And finally, I think again, leading by example, because I actually am very team first, I'm often actually helping other teams and doing things that might not ultimately benefit or be part of my scope. A good example here is I was actually driving pricing and packaging at Webflow for a very long time just because no one at the company was driving it and it was a huge opportunity area and I actually was doing it for enterprise pricing too. And so even though I am overseeing self-serve, I was actually supporting enterprise pricing and packaging. And so I also showed to my team, "Hey, I'm also doing all these things to help the company." And I think that is what helps set that tone and that culture.

Lenny (00:36:55):
How do you then avoid doing too much work? I think there's also this challenge of people being too good at too many things and then they end up doing so many things and then they burn out. Do you have any rules of thumb or lessons there?

Melissa Tan (00:37:06):
I think for me it's been a learning journey too. I've actually gotten feedback on that very thing for my team that Melissa sometimes taking on too much or trying to do too much. And so I think it's a delicate balance. If we're talking about that person individually, you have to know what your limits are and you also can do things in spurts, but it's important to know ultimately what you can take on. Also I find that putting a specific timeline like, "Hey, I'm going to do this thing for a quarter, but after that we really need to find somebody else to do it." Or hand it off is really helpful. It's definitely a delicate balance. I do think it's a great question because I think that's a common thing people early in their careers struggle with, which is they could lose focus because they're trying to help everybody.

(00:37:49):
That was actually a problem I had when I first joined Dropbox is I was the only sales ops person, so I was just helping every sales leader with their metrics and very focused. And so it is a little bit of trial and error. I think the most important thing is to not be so overly focused on just what you're doing and try to help others, but then knowing that there are certain things that just can't drop. And if you start to see things that are starting to drop that you're ultimately responsible for, that's a signal that you're taking on too much.

Lenny (00:38:18):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool.

(00:38:45):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage, Eppo does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytic cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click-through metrics and instead use your North Star metrics like activation, retention, subscription and payments. Eppo supports test on the front end, on the back end, email marketing, even machine learning claims. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, that's geteppo.com and 10x your experiment velocity.

(00:39:25):
Let's come back to the developing talent bucket. I would kind of went on a tangent, but I want to come back to that. So we talked about why you're excited about developing talent, the benefits you've experienced. I'm curious what you actually do to help people become better product managers, leaders of all kinds. What actually have you seen works?

Melissa Tan (00:39:42):
In terms of developing talent, I think of this as stages of the life cycle of your relationship, right? So I think at first actually starts is a very meta as a growth person starts with when you hire somebody, really making sure you're finding somebody that is a good fit for the role. It's a good mutual fit. I also tend to look for folks that have a growth mindset.

(00:40:06):
There're people that are wanting to learn. They're looking for feedback. They take feedback well. And then after that they join the company, and as a manager, my job is to help set them up for success. So how do I ramp them up as quickly as possible, connect them to the right people, the company? How do I also make sure it's clear what success looks like in their first 90 days? And then how do I help them secure early wins essentially?

(00:40:32):
So I often will suggest, "Hey, you should do this presentation. It's a great way to get visibility early in your journey here." Here are some things where there's low hanging fruit or even rotting fruit that you should take on into secure early wins. Then in your journey, I think it's a lot about just giving feedback along the way, making sure you give visibility. One recent hack I have is having folks on the team create looms that they can share with different leaders at Webflow. It's hard to sometimes get visibility and get live meeting calendars, but if you create a five or 10 minute-loom on something you did. That's just a great way to get visibility.

(00:41:10):
And then finally, I think it's that lifelong relationship actually. So I'm still in touch with a lot of people that I've managed and I've helped them. Whether it's looking for their new job or they have career advice, I always make myself available. And so it's actually that lifelong journey of just developing that person. And at some point it's not even developing that person, but it's having a friendship with somebody. And I feel like I've learned a ton from people that I have managed. And so it ends up being this really great thing where you initially started working together but you now know each other so well. And I think that's even how I've developed as a manager is just getting feedback from my team.

Lenny (00:41:51):
This all comes back to something you mentioned a couple of times earlier, just caring a lot about the person that you work with. Your approach also reminds me of this book, Radical Candor. I imagine you're a fan and that's kind of the way you think about it.

Melissa Tan (00:42:03):
Yeah, definitely. Interestingly enough, Kim Scott was at Dropbox for a short period of time, so when I joined Dropbox, she was actually on my interview panel and we overlapped for three months and she actually workshopped that book with our team before she published it. And that always resonated with me. And I remember her saying you have to ... I forget the exact words, but it's essentially be direct but deeply care.

Lenny (00:42:30):
Yeah. Care deeply, but something directly challenged directly. Something like that.

Melissa Tan (00:42:36):
Yeah, care deeply but challenge directly and that has always been something that is something I try to infuse and has really inspired me as leader.

Lenny (00:42:43):
Awesome. We're going to link to that book if folks don't know about it. I love it. You talked about hiring PMs and how that is important in building high performing teams. So let's spend a little time there, maybe just two questions all throughout and you can approach them however you want. One is just what do you look for when you're hiring product managers? You've hired a lot of PMs. You've managed a lot of PMs over the years. What do you look for, especially things that maybe other people don't focus on enough, and then just what is your interview process? What do you find is most helpful for interviewing process-wise?

Melissa Tan (00:43:13):
In terms of what I look for, I think there's this kind of known list of things that you probably want to look for, for a PM that I probably are not going to ... I'm say anything groundbreaking here, but obviously communication skills, the ability to manage stakeholders and work well cross-functionally. The things that I lean especially heavy on in my interview process is this concept of first principles thinking or strong critical thinking. So usually there's some live problem solving component to my interview process where I really lean more heavily into how would you approach X problem? And then I dig into the Y and try to understand why would they approach it this way, see what questions they're asking and just see how they approach problem solving.

(00:43:55):
And then the other thing that I look for that I mentioned is that growth mindset. So really seeing how does this person take feedback. And so I'll actually sometimes give feedback to candidates through the process. Something that I do that I learned a few years ago that was super helpful, so I always have a presentation component to the interview process that checks for prepared thinking communication. And I recommend a prep call between the two of us before that presentation. And I actually will give feedback on the presentation.

(00:44:26):
And what this gives me signal is what is it actually going to be like to work together? And then I see how they incorporate it into the final product and that is always really interesting and sometimes it's the biggest signal to what it's going to be like to work with this person.

Lenny (00:44:39):
Okay, this is great. I want to spend a little time here. So what is the actual sequence that you recommend or you use for interviewing? There's a presentation, there's a rep call but also is kind of involved in that.

Melissa Tan (00:44:49):
Usually hiring manager screen, and I actually do the live problem solving at this screen. I actually think it weeds out the most people. And there's actually two things I do here. One is a live problem solving. How would you approach X? So let's say I'm hiring for pricing at Webflow, I would ask, "How would you approach pricing?" I sometimes would say, "Hey, do you have your laptop? Can you pull up our pricing page? Curious to get your thoughts, what would you want to change?" That was a trick I learned at Dropbox where we would actually pull up the Dropbox website and be like, "Hey, what'd you want to test here? Why?" And you get a ton of signal on how they approach the problem, how they think.

(00:45:25):
I ask why a bunch. And then the next screen is talking to more folks at the team that test for different competencies. And depending on what you're hiring for, we just have each person focused on a different competency. And it also depends on the roles. So some roles are more technical, some require working more closely with different stakeholders, so you want to make sure you can test those things. And then the final round is the presentation and then also maybe a conversation on other areas.

(00:45:52):
We want that kind of come through the interview process. We want to dig in further. The presentation is usually thinking through how you'd approach, your collecting all this information on the company or the problem throughout the interview process. And so it culminates in what do you think this should look like or maybe what would you want to do in your first 90 days? It depends on the role, but it's usually some type of presentation about the problem you would be working on at the company.

(00:46:18):
Before that, we have that preparation call with me where often candidates will have questions like, "Oh, I need to know this data," or "I'm curious about X." And so it's really just a call to help them. And then at this stage too, they'll often have the actual draft of the presentation and so we'll go through it together and I'll actually be like, "Hey, I think you should lean in heavier here. How would you think about this?" I'll even say for example, at Webflow I'll be like, "We're thinking about X, Y, Z thing just so you know. And maybe incorporating that into your presentation would be really helpful.

(00:46:50):
And so that's where I get a lot of signal of what is it going to be like to work with this person on a presentation? And then I'll see in the presentation whether they incorporate it or not or how they did. And sometimes I've seen candidates that didn't incorporate any of it and I kind of am like, "Okay, this is probably not a fit." And actually I think that other thing about that call is it helps just set the candidate up for success. It's actually quite a lot of work to create a presentation. The more we can help them by giving them information, making sure they can be successful, it's helpful. And I think guess lastly, it gives them a taste of what it's like to work with me.

Lenny (00:47:26):
I've never heard of that step before. That is really interesting. They actually give them feedback before they present. I imagine they're like, "What the hell is going on here?" I thought I was trying to show them what I can do, not like they're going to help me do a great job. That is really interesting. Maybe two very logistical questions there. How much time do you give them to work on this presentation? And then two, you said that you asked some questions related to the actual problem solving versus a theoretical problem. So those are the two questions, I guess.

Melissa Tan (00:47:52):
Typically we will schedule it about a week in advance. They have a week. The tricky thing here is obviously it's a big ask to ask someone to create a presentation. And so if it's one week that's long enough to create it, but it's short enough that you don't spend tons of time. The other thing is just making it clear, don't exceed more than X number of slides. In Webflow's case we've done, don't exceed more than 30 slides. And that's like quite a lot. We do not expect you to do 30 slides. And then the other thing I make sure to emphasize is it's really about wanting to know how you'd approach it. So don't worry about the slides, be able to talk to it and have what you need to talk to it because we're actually just looking for the substance. And so that's how much time we give them and it's usually a 30-minute presentation with 15-minute Q&A.

(00:48:42):
The second part of your question was, so in terms of picking the topic, so there's a few ways to think about it. I know some folks will be like, "Oh, we have candidates present on something they've worked with in the past." I've tried that form and it's really difficult because I found that candidates even sometimes spend tons of time sharing the context of that company. And then also it doesn't really give a sense of, because as you're interviewing from a role, you're getting a ton of context on the actual company and the problem. And so it also is testing for how much did they pick up along the way. Also, would they like working on this area once they join? So there are some candidates that sometimes are concerned about the amount of time they would spend on it or say, "This is going to be a big lift."

(00:49:30):
And definitely mindful of that. I think the main thing though is it is actually in the candidate's best interest to kind of understand what they're going to work on and start to understand,

Melissa Tan (00:49:40):
For example, there are some candidates that have gone through the far through process and haven't worked in the Webflow product very much. And I always think that's an interesting flag because if you aren't in the product a lot, you're not going to get good context on whether you like it or not. And so I actually think it's almost even in the best interest of the candidate to go much deeper.

Lenny (00:49:59):
I could spend another hour talking about interview strategy, but I want to make sure we have time for the growth team stuff. So let's transition to that. And my first question here is you've worked with a lot of different teams, a lot of different companies on helping them figure out their growth strategy, hiring their growth teams, just kind of figuring out growth. I'm curious what the most common pitfalls and mistakes you've seen across companies trying to figure out growth and build growth teams.

Melissa Tan (00:50:26):
One of the most common pitfalls I'd say is not having, and I've alluded to this, not having a sense of the big picture from the start and not being strategic about what your go-to market strategy is going to be. Also, what is your pricing and packaging going to look like? So I wrote actually an article for the YC blog a few years ago with Abby [inaudible 00:50:48] who was on my team at Dropbox about this because I felt like even at Dropbox, I mean it's a great thing. We were haphazardly finding amazing things. We had a freemium consumer product. Then we realized people wanted a Teams product, so we built a Teams product, but we never created that whole blueprint of what should it look like and what are the different connection points across consumer business? What should our model look like? I've also seen companies that maybe weren't intentional enough about pricing from the start, and so thinking about what is the value metric?

(00:51:20):
And then they've already have massive scale and then they're rethinking their pricing. That's actually quite a big headache to actually think about, okay, how do we grandfather users? How do we bring the legacy customers onto our new pricing? And so thinking about your pricing from the start is important thing might go to market from the start is important. The other thing I have seen a lot is just like, again, this goes back to learning from Dropbox is the execution folks taking a class or reading a lot about growth and trying to do the same thing and not really actually starting from first let's look at our data. Let's talk to our customers. What do we think are the biggest hypotheses? And starting your experiments based on your own data and right-sizing the experiment.

(00:52:10):
I think sometimes teams are experimenting on things that are too small, that aren't going to move the needle because they heard it was really successful company X, but that company X might be a Dropbox where every 0.5% improvement in conversion makes a difference, but if you're early stage doesn't matter and you need to actually think bigger. The other thing is the opposite problem, redoing a whole thing but not having a hypothesis, this was an early mistake I made at Dropbox where I redid the checkout page to something that I thought was better UX, but then I changed so many different components that even when it failed, it was unclear why it failed. So really distilling it to hypotheses.

(00:52:48):
And then the last thing I would say is figuring out what I call the flying formation of how the different growth teams will work with other companies. And again, I alluded to this, but growth shouldn't feel like it's a layer on top. And a lot of the things that are tricky early on is figuring out how you work with other teams. I think the best or the ideal way to work is to have growth infuse in the company. And so an example here is often the growth team is going to be potentially the closest to the user.

(00:53:21):
They're going to get a lot of feedback. They're going to hear directly from the user. As a growth team, I think one of the big values that we can have is actually giving that feedback back to other teams at the company. And so even as a growth team, can we help inform the product roadmap? Also on the reverse, thinking about as PMs, how can PMs be more growth oriented as well?

Lenny (00:53:44):
I like this term flying formation. I've never heard of this before. What is that exactly again? Is that just how growth is integrated within the company?

Melissa Tan (00:53:51):
Yeah, I guess flying formation essentially, I don't know where it comes from. I guess maybe it's a military term or something. Your finger.

Lenny (00:53:59):
I can say that. Yeah, like the Blue Angels

Melissa Tan (00:54:00):
Work together?

Lenny (00:54:01):
Yeah.

Melissa Tan (00:54:02):
Yeah. I think of flying formation as how do we work together across teams. You also can think of it as a DACI too, driver accountable, contribute informed. I think sometimes when you don't know how you're going to work together, you end up stepping over each other's toes. You're unclear. Who was the decision maker here? Who did we need to work with? At what point in the journey? And so the flying formation, what I think it is, is part of it is a DACI of what are the different roles?

Lenny (00:54:32):
Can you define that actually? Because a lot of people probably won't know that term.

Melissa Tan (00:54:36):
A DACI is a framework to think about the different roles on the team on a project or an area. So D stands for Driver. This is the person driving the project. A is Accountable, this is the person that's ultimately accountable and is often the final decision maker if there's any open questions. C is Contributor, these are all the different teams that are going to contribute. And then I is informed. These are the people that need to be informed, but they're not directly contributing. They're not a decision maker and part of the project.

(00:55:08):
And so it's a nice simple framework for when you are working across teams and it needs to be clear who is in what role. And the area that tends to be the most confusing can be the accountable and who the decision maker is. It can be easy to have lots of teams and then it's unclear how do we get to a decision ultimately and who should make that decision. And that person should often be the person that has the most context or is ultimately responsible.

(00:55:33):
And so I think the flying formation has this DACI. I often also put operating rhythms in it, so it's clear what is happening at what point. And so we created a flying formation when we were first starting the growth team at Webflow and we were trying to figure out how does product growth work with product, how does product growth work with growth marketing? What are the different cadences that each team has? And so very tactically we put a doc together to say, okay, product growth is accountable for all the metrics downstream of signups. Growth marketing is accountable for signups. They're also driving or have goals around CAC, their customer acquisition costs, and these are the different metrics everyone owns.

(00:56:14):
We have a weekly meeting where we look at the metrics together. We also will do updates around the room to talk about initiatives and identify areas we want to work with. And then we also think through quarterly planning where we're each identifying projects that we're driving. There's some projects that we might also work on together. And so it's essentially that meeting cadence that you're going to have the operating rhythms. That's essentially how I think about a flying formation.

Lenny (00:56:40):
I love it. That would make a great blog post. By the way, if you're looking for something to write an example of your actual client formation Webflow, I think people would love that.

Melissa Tan (00:56:48):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:56:48):
One kind of tangent that I wanted to touch on is there's this trend of product teams owning revenue. Elena talked about this on a recent podcast. You have a perspective on should product growth teams own revenue and have revenue numbers as their goals or not?

Melissa Tan (00:57:04):
Yeah, really it depends on the company and what product growth is driving. I've always, in the companies I was at and actually even the companies I advise, the product growth team owns revenue, so it's not always the case. I've actually seen revenue owned by marketing. So marketing makes sense if it's more top of funnel growth. I've also seen it, this is an interesting one, by finance actually. This is usually early in the company.

(00:57:31):
So early at Canva, it was owned by finance and that's because finance had a view on everything happening in the business and would actually be maybe advising other teams on, "Hey, our conversion rates could improve, we need to do X." Or we're not driving signups and customers efficiently, but over time it doesn't really sit in finance. That has evolved and then now sits under the person that is driving product growth in product. So I have seen it more often than not being owned by product. Our team at Dropbox moved a ton actually. We started marketing. We actually then report into the revenue org with sales, and then we finally moved into product because we realized so much of our revenue was that product growth motion happening in the product that we felt it was important that that product team owned revenue.

Lenny (00:58:20):
A lot of the things you're talking about are based in how growth starts at a company. I imagine one of the most common questions you get is, how do I start to invest in growth? How do I hire my first growth person? How do I build a team around them? It's one of the most common questions I get. So let's spend a little time here. What is your advice to founders that are just starting to think about building their initial growth team and how to approach that to look for initially and kind of think about that longer term?

Melissa Tan (00:58:44):
I get this question a lot as well. I'd say initially when a company's starting out, the goal is getting to product market fit and figuring out who their ideal customer profile is, like their ICP. And at this point, I think everyone at the company should be thinking about growth. They're finding their first few design partners that they will co-create the product with. They're figuring out who is their product resonating with, who is maybe also the decision maker in purchasing the product. And they're figuring out, do we want kind of a bottom up product led motion? Are we going to lean more heavily into sales? Are we going to do both?

(00:59:18):
After you reach product market fit and you're starting to get your first few customers, the first growth per person I see more often than not isn't someone driving acquisition. You need to find your first a thousand or thousands of customers and you need to do it at scale. And so if that is the focus of the company, typically what I would recommend is somebody that they don't need to be an expert, but ideally they understand maybe one or two channels well and that they're the channels that you have hypothesis, you will find traction in.

(00:59:50):
And I see this person a little bit like a portfolio manager, right? Because you're trying to figure out ... Usually companies don't have many channels that are split evenly. They find one or two that really work and make up like it's 80/20 rule. It makes us up 80% of where the signups are coming from and this portfolio manager is testing different things out. Even you could leverage agencies. There are a lot of agencies out there for SEO, for paid marketing, et cetera, but they are smart enough to define, is this working? How do I do it at scale? You also want to make sure it's quality signups that are actually monetizable.

(01:00:24):
And so that is a role typically if you're hiring an acquisition of that first growth person. And then the other two areas to focus early on, but I don't think you need a dedicated person for are activation. You want to make sure as you're pouring leads into the top of funnel, you're activating users. And here I don't think you actually need to do AB testing. Your volume isn't probably going to be strong enough. I think even just finding five individuals that are part of your target audience, just doing user testing, set up a Zoom, watch them onboard onto the product and have them talk out loud. You'll fight a lot and you can also just take best practices of onboarding checklists, et cetera. So activation and then I've said this a lot, but pricing and packaging, really thinking about pricing, but I don't think that needs to be a dedicated person.

Lenny (01:01:06):
What kind of profile have you found to be most successful for this sort of person? Some people will look for like, I want to hire Melissa and let's just go big. The best person I can find and have them own this versus someone that's just new from school that's going to figure it out and I guess they're somewhere in the middle. What do you find that's best for that first hire?

Melissa Tan (01:01:26):
It really depends on the current makeup of the team. How much do the founders themselves or the current team, how much of an interest do they have in growth? If they have an interest in growth and it's more about finding someone to execute, I think it's finding someone that's a bit earlier in their career potentially that is just a strong first principles thinker. I think there's hit or miss on, I'm a former consultant, so I used to always say find a former consultant. I do think there can be hit or miss and there is some value in folks that actually understand acquisition and have done it before and so maybe have figured out certain channels.

(01:02:04):
So I think you either go for someone that's done acquisition before, maybe they're a little bit early in their career, so they have this great growth mindset, but make sure they're a first principles thinker. The other option is find just a really smart person early in their career, have them take up Reforge class, have them soak up everything, and then the other option of hiring someone more experienced. I think it really depends on if you want that person to take on a lot more and be almost part of your founding team. And do you want to find someone that is going to join your leadership team?

(01:02:38):
The other option I guess is you could also just bring on an advisor and that advisor is someone that's not full time. It can even guide if you hire someone that's a bit earlier, guide that person and that is a really good combination. And so it really depends on the context, who's also on the current team and who you want to bring into. Are you looking for an actual leader that's going to scale with the company or are you not ready quite yet for that?

Lenny (01:03:03):
What about in terms of their skillset? I imagine if you're kind of feeling like paid growth is going to be your main acquisition channel, you probably want to find someone that's really good at that versus it might be a virality, product led growth stuff, then you want to find maybe a product range of person. How much weight do you put into that skillset in that first hire?

Melissa Tan (01:03:24):
I actually think it's less about expertise in skillset, if that makes sense. And more there a ability to, again, I think of it like a portfolio manager. So this is more on the growth marketing side and bringing in acquisition. They are managing a portfolio and they're trying to figure out what works. I actually think you need to find someone that's analytical for this role, but that also understands things like who is the user? They're really creative in finding the user. And so it's actually looking for attributes but not expertise.

(01:03:58):
I actually think the more expertise someone has, the more it actually can lead to a false precision and then thinking they know what they're going to do. And especially, I don't think you actually need paid marketing expertise until much later when you're starting to think about incrementality or you're managing all these campaigns. I actually think the expertise is more important later. And then similarly on product growth, I actually think product growth is not higher till much later. A lot of early stage companies don't even have a product manager until later. And so I find that a growth product person isn't until much later down the road.

Lenny (01:04:36):
Just a couple more questions. One is, you mentioned that it sometimes makes sense to bring on an advisor. I know sometimes companies have a bad time with advisors that just don't provide much value and they're giving equity. Other times it's transformative. Some of the stories you've shared, when is it appropriate to hire an advisor and is there any, I guess advice for what to look for in a growth advisor at this early stage, especially?

Melissa Tan (01:05:00):
I would add an advisor if there is probably a knowledge gap on the team is I would say. And their advisors come in so many different forms too, and everyone does it slightly differently. For some folks, it's a monthly call for other times, especially when I'm full-time advising, I'll have weekly calls. I'll even join some team meetings. I'll look at mocks. And so everyone does it slightly differently. And so I think it depends on what you're looking for. I would definitely say that even getting to know the individual and making sure you're on the same page on what you're looking for and what the goals are. And then what I've done in the past too is initially set up a shorter engagement, like a quarter long engagement and then decide if you want to go longer.

(01:05:47):
And I also think it's fine to, let's say you have an advisor agreement, you're not getting value to basically part ways. If it's not, you're not finding value. I think every advisor wants to make sure they're adding value. So I definitely think to summarize, being really explicit on what advice you're looking for and making sure you're on the same page of what you want. And then also set up a try before you buy if you want to do a quarter long engagement first. And knowing you can always part ways if it's not a fit even before that period of time.

Lenny (01:06:20):
Last question before we get to a very exciting lightning round. You've brought up this concept of first principles thinking. I'm curious how you measure that and how you get a sense of, is this person strong at first principles thinking?

Melissa Tan (01:06:34):
It's definitely a word I use a lot. First principles thinking, I think of it as you are not using a set framework and set formula, but you're creating your own based on the context that you're getting. And so when I think about first principles thinking often it is knowing what questions to ask so that you can start forming a mental model. And then it is actually starting to form that mental model and then knowing to evolve it and knowing when it's not working and really coming from a place of curiosity of is this really working? This is something that I'm known for on my team as well, which is I ask tons of questions, but it doesn't come from a place of wanting to show that I'm asking good questions or anything that comes from a place of trying to solve the problem and making sure that we're always solving the problem at hand, making sure we're doing the right things.

(01:07:28):
If there's new information, do we actually still want to do it this way? And so I think first principles thinking is often about asking questions and then creating your own framework. That's how I would define it. And it's maybe another way to describe it is critical thinking. It's like you're able to think very critically, and I think it's important to, at least for me, create a culture where that's okay. I think the moment you have a culture where people aren't asking questions aren't constantly revisiting their work, that's when you're not maybe pushing yourself to do your best work. And I think it also just creates a fun environment where we're like, "Oh yeah, why are we doing this?" And really leading with your curiosity.

Lenny (01:08:06):
Is there an example of a person or moment or question that comes to mind of this is an epitome of a first principles thinker moment or question or a way of approaching something?

Melissa Tan (01:08:17):
My aha moment of the value of first principles thinking was when I was at Dropbox and we had the most unconventional people on our initial sales team. Dropbox was known for this. We would hire a ton of really smart people that had never done sales and had them do sales. There were a lot of disadvantages to that, I think. We were figuring a lot of things out. Maybe we should have split, had a few people that knew sales better and a combo of both. But I do think it led to a ton of innovation. Even I actually started on the sales team, this is a fun fact. I used to answer the 1-800 number at Dropbox, and if you go to Dropbox's website, you see a chat level. I used to also do that role, and so I think that what we got from that was that's how we got our very innovative go-to-market motions.

(01:09:03):
That also gave a ton of people, 'cause a lot of those people then moved into different functions at the company. They had all this context on who the user was. They had talked to so many different users at that point, and that's actually what helped me a lot when I moved into growth is I had all that context and I learned from that going back to first principles thinking that if you take people that are just super smart, they've never done it before, one advantage of that is they can innovate because I think they come in with, "I don't know anything. Let me just figure this out." Versus someone that think they know all the answers, limits you into what you are going to do. And so my aha moment was really at Dropbox seeing so many times people that had never done these things and then seeing so much innovation come as a result of that.

Lenny (01:09:51):
That is an awesome story. Is there anything else you wanted to share or touch on before we get to or very exciting lightning round?

Melissa Tan (01:09:58):
I think that's it. I wanted to make sure, I know I talked a lot about developing people, so thank all the people that have helped develop me in my career and then especially thank all the folks that I've worked with and my team, especially the team at Webflow and particularly wanted to make sure to thank [Xing Lin 01:10:14], Rory Davidson and [Jo Wang01:10:16] who joined me from previous companies to Webflow.

Lenny (01:10:20):
Shoutouts. Well, with that, Melissa, we have reached our very exciting lightning ground. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Melissa Tan (01:10:27):
Yes.

Lenny (01:10:28):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Melissa Tan (01:10:32):
The first one is Leaders Eat Last. I really like that leadership book by Simon Sinek. Also two non-career related books is The Untethered Soul. It really has taught me a lot about being present and then also the Four Agreements, which is a very short and easy read, but good principles to live by.

Lenny (01:10:52):
What is a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Melissa Tan (01:10:55):
This one isn't super recent, but Winning Time on HBO. It's about the LA Lakers during the '80s and the Showtime era. I'm originally from LA and grew up a Lakers fan, so it's a fun watch for me and a nice escape.

Lenny (01:11:09):
You'll love a new movie I just watched last night called Air, which is about how Nike got Michael Jordan signed. And it's similar vibes to that show.

Melissa Tan (01:11:18):
Yes, yes. I actually just watched that recently too.

Lenny (01:11:20):
Okay. Great.

Melissa Tan (01:11:20):
That's a good one too. Yeah, I've watched all those basketball.

Lenny (01:11:23):
Oh man. I also grew up in LA. Also a huge Laker fan from-

Melissa Tan (01:11:26):
Oh, nice.

Lenny (01:11:27):
From before. Next question, what's a favorite interview question you like to ask?

Melissa Tan (01:11:33):
For me, it's not a question, but it's that stage of preparing before the presentation and getting a sense for what it's like to work with each other. I think that has been one of the best ways for me to get signal.

Lenny (01:11:45):
Can you say more on that?

Melissa Tan (01:11:46):
Yes. So it's essentially that prep call before I ask them to do a presentation and going through the presentation together and working together on refining it.

Lenny (01:11:57):
Awesome. We already talked about that, so we'll move on. What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you love?

Melissa Tan (01:12:04):
I feel like everyone's saying this, but ChatGPT. I feel like it has really changed everything. There's so many interesting ways to use it. My team at Webflow right now is also starting to think about incorporating AI into the product, and so yeah, I just think that is ... Yeah, so many things you can do with it.

Lenny (01:12:22):
What is something relatively minor that you've changed in your product development process that has had a big impact on the way that your team executes?

Melissa Tan (01:12:30):
This one here is what I also spoke about for earlier, which is, I mean, thinking through your DACI. It sounds so simple, but I do think a lot of times teams are thinking through how do they work with other teams? Who is driving? Who is the decision maker? And so having a DACI, I have found is really helpful.

Lenny (01:12:52):
Final question, you've been at Webflow for a number of years. What is a favorite pro tip for using Webflow?

Melissa Tan (01:12:57):
Yeah, I actually have two if that's okay.

Lenny (01:12:59):
That's good. Even better [inaudible 01:13:01].

Melissa Tan (01:13:01):
Yeah, yeah. So one is thing that I've often heard from folks is it's hard to learn Webflow. And so basically watching our university videos, which is where we teach Webflow while also building the designer, and we actually now enable to have the videos in the product, so you can do them side by side. And then the other one is our Figma to Webflow plugin, which is you can take a Figma design and then convert it to Webflow, which is a great hack if you already have a design in Figma.

Lenny (01:13:32):
Wow, I did not know that existed. That is a really smart idea and feature. Melissa, I could see why people follow you from company to company. I feel like the companies that are going to get to work with you in this new stage of your life are also very lucky. Thank you for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Melissa Tan (01:13:51):
Folks can find me on LinkedIn, also on Twitter, Melissamtan, and then how can listeners be helpful to me? I mean, I love jamming on things, growth, thinking about leadership and managing, so if any of this resonates, reach out. I'd love to have a discussion and yeah.

Lenny (01:14:08):
Amazing. Melissa, again, thank you for being here.

Melissa Tan (01:14:11):
Yes, thanks so much, Lenny. This was fun.

Lenny (01:14:14):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:00:00):
... early days, it's very important to just go back to the basics, build the skeleton before you put on the makeup. So the first question I would ask is, do you have a website? Is it fast? Do the search engine knows that it exists? Okay, great. The next step would be, can people find it? If they can't find it, do you need to write content to make sure that people can find it? Only after all of those questions are answered, should you then consider, do I have money? Can I put it behind some paid ads to make sure people come to my website? You can't run a successful paid ads program if you have a website that's loading in four plus seconds. So really going back to the basics and starting from a good experience at the core and then expanding step-by-step from there.

Lenny (00:00:47):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Meltem Kuran Berkowitz. Meltem is head of growth at Deel, which is arguably the fastest growing SaaS business of all time, possibly even faster than Ramp, which we delved into in a previous episode. They went from $0 in revenue to a mind-boggling $300 million in revenue in three years, while also staying EBITDA positive.

Lenny (00:01:15):
Meltem has led their growth team from the early days. And today leads all their growth efforts, including paid ads, product marketing, content, community, brand and more. Before joining Deel, she was leading marketing efforts at Bench Accounting. In our conversation, Meltem shares how Deel kick started growth through low-cost growth channels like tapping into communities like Reddit and also content and SEO. She also talks about how she evolved her thinking on growth investments as the company grew. She shares a bunch of tactical advice for how to do SEO well, how to do paid ads well, and how to structure your early growth team and prioritize your early investments. She also shares her experience building a culture of speed and optimism and so much more. Enjoy this episode with Meltem Kuran Berkowitz after a short word from our sponsors.

Lenny (00:02:01):
Today's episode is brought to you by Miro, an online collaborative whiteboard that's designed specifically for teams like yours. The best way to see what Miro is all about and how it can help your team collaborate better is not to listen to me talk about it, but to go check it out for yourself, go to miro.com/lenny. With the help of the Miro team, I created a super cool Miro board with two of my own favorite templates, my one pager template and my managing up template that you can plug and play and start using immediately with your team. I've also embedded a handful of my favorite templates that other people have published in the Miro-verse. When you get to the board, you can also leave suggestions for the podcast, answer a question that I have for you, and generally just play around to get a sense of how it all works.

Lenny (00:02:44):
Miro is a killer tool for brainstorming with your team, laying out your strategy, sharing user research findings, capturing ideas, giving feedback on wireframes, and generally just collaborating with your colleagues. I actually used Miro to collaborate with the Miro team on creating my own board, and it was super fun and super easy. Go check it out at miro.com/lenny. That's M-I-R-O.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:03:10):
Today's episode is brought to you by LMNT. I just recently discovered this stuff actually from another podcast, and it is such sweet, salty goodness. LMNT is a tasty electrolyte drink mix with a science-backed electrolyte ratio. And unlike most electrolyte drinks, there's no sugar, coloring, artificial ingredients, gluten or any other BS. Getting enough electrolytes helps prevent and eliminate headaches, muscle cramps, fatigue, sleeplessness, and other common symptoms of electrolyte deficiency. LMNT is the exclusive hydration partner to Team USA Weightlifting and many other Olympic athletes. Also dozens of NBA and NFL teams and players rely on LMNT to stay hydrated along with Navy SEAL teams, FBI sniper teams and the Marines.

Lenny (00:03:52):
You can try LMNT totally risk-free. If you don't like it, you can share it with a salty friend and they'll give you your money back no questions asked. To give it a shot, go to drinklmnt.com/lenny and you'll get a free sample pack with any purchase, which includes one packet of every flavor. My favorite is Watermelon Salt. You won't find this offer publicly available, so you have to head to drinklmnt.com/lenny to take advantage of this offer. Stay salty.

Lenny (00:04:22):
Meltem, thank you so much for being here, welcome to the podcast.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:04:26):
Thank you for having me, I'm very excited to be here.

Lenny (00:04:28):
I'm more excited that you're here. So you're head of growth at Deel. For people that aren't familiar with Deel, can you just give us a sense of what does Deel do briefly? And then also can you just share some stats around the trajectory of Deel? It feels like it's been this extraordinary journey, and I'm curious just to hear some of the stats of just how extraordinary.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:04:46):
Yeah, so Deel is payroll, HR, and compliance platform for global teams. So essentially we help companies expand globally with tools like Deel HR, immigration, employer record hiring, independent contractor hiring, payroll, both global and US. So whether you're trying to hire someone as a full-time employee in Japan or you're trying to make sure your contractor in Germany has everything they need on day one, our platform allows you to take care of everything all in one place.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:05:13):
And when I joined Deel, actually that was around July, 2020, we were less than a million dollars in ARR. And then over time, within the first year on January, 2021, we were at $4 million ARR. We finished 2021 with 57 million. April '22, we were looking at a hundred million. And then we started off this year with $295 million in ARR. And what we're particularly proud of is that we've been EBITDA positive. So that's something that we are very, very proud of on top of the ARR growth.

Lenny (00:05:48):
Amazing. And you said that you were super early at Deel. Can you give us a sense of just how early and what that was like?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:05:54):
I was the second hire to the marketing team, and I was I believe either employee 19 or 20 on the overall Deel team.

Lenny (00:06:02):
We had the head of product from Ramp on this podcast, and it feels like there's this little bit of which company grew faster early on in the trajectory of the two, but we don't have to debate it. It feels like these are maybe the two fastest growing SaaS businesses in history. Does that sound about right?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:06:16):
That's true, yeah. So Ramp was the first one to be crowned the fastest growing, and then we took that crown from them. So I think we're both right, in that at a certain point in time we've each been the fastest growing. But they're amazing.

Lenny (00:06:34):
What I want to start with is something that I heard about you, which is that you specialize in cheaper growth channels, and that's actually the reason that Deel ended up hiring you, is they wanted to find ways to grow cheaply. And so a couple of questions. One is just, what did you find worked really well from that perspective at Deel? And then two, what are today's maybe cheaper growth channels that you think people are under investing in? Whatever you're willing to share there, I don't know if you want to give away all your secrets.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:06:56):
I'm happy to give away all and everything. So I think before we dive into the list of cheap channels, which I will get to, it's very important to notice, especially in the B2B world, most of the businesses are started because there's an active problem. And so when you go out to the market and try to answer people's questions, people don't want to be sold to, they want their problem solved. So those cheaper channels are often places where people are just trying to get an answer to their question. So whether that be search engine optimization through the articles that you write for people, looking onto Reddit where people are asking these questions in communities, forming partnerships with other groups that are trying to answer these questions, existing communities where other business leaders are connecting with each other and looking at their peers to find answers to shared problems that they're having, or places like Quora. That's, when you think about cheap channels, that's a really good place to start, is just add value to people, answer their questions.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:07:54):
And when you answer their questions and present your solution, if it's a fit to what they're looking for, that ends up being a cheap channel for you. You don't necessarily have to advertise, when you go to Reddit and you set up those keywords to be tracking when people ask certain questions, you're not paying any money to do that. You're just seeing, oh, someone has this question, I have the answer to that, here you go. And connecting with them, it takes time. But early on, those were a lot of the things that we invested in.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:08:21):
And I think a lot of people jump that because they think, "Oh, it's one person here, two people there." But when you start helping people, that combined with word of mouth, and guess what, these are digital places, you provide one answer and your answer lives out there for other people to repeatedly refine. As long as we're not talking about a closed Slack community, maybe a conversation happening in DMs. So when I think about cheap channels, I think about where are people asking the questions, that might be Google or that might be Reddit or any other channel, and providing them the answers, so they know that your solution exists.

Lenny (00:08:59):
Okay, this is awesome. So this Reddit example is that, which you actually did, you set alerts for when people have questions about HR hiring internationally I imagine, and then had someone go in there and give them some advice?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:09:10):
Yes, exactly that's what we did.

Lenny (00:09:12):
Wow, I love that.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:09:12):
It's important to notice that if you're looking at a subreddit of about a thousand people, recognize the upper size of this audience, you're not going to win 5,000 businesses through that Reddit community, but you're maybe going to win 10% of the people there that are having this problem. So it's very important when investing in these cheap channels to focus on what's the upper limit of the audience size.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:09:36):
And also I see a lot of people sometimes go blindly into SEO. They're like, "We're just going to write content," which I'm a huge fan of SEO, happy to discuss that later, but if people aren't asking this question to Google, you can write all the content you want, it doesn't matter, nobody's going to find it.

Lenny (00:09:52):
I love this so much, because it connects with something I find again and again, is one of the more effective early growth channels is tapping into an existing community and piggybacking off of what they've already built. Airbnb is a little bit of an example where they went to Craigslist. Actually most people pull people off Craigslist, Uber pull people off Craigslist, Lyft, so many companies just piggybacked off Craigslist and built up their own company.

Lenny (00:10:13):
But what you said is so important, which is you can't just go into a community and be like, "Hey, everyone, check out what I've got." You need to add value to people and add value to the community, otherwise no one's going to pay attention to you, they're going to kick you out.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:10:25):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:10:25):
And so I think that is a really important insight is if you're trying to say piggyback off of a community, the most important thing is you need to add value to the community.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:10:34):
Yeah, be someone people actually want to talk to.

Lenny (00:10:37):
I love that. Is there a tool that you found for that Reddit strategy of just how to know if someone's talking about hiring say internationally?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:10:45):
I did a very janky assistant setup, I'm not proud of it, but it works. Someone else out there built it and I just plugged in the keywords we were looking for into it.

Lenny (00:10:57):
I know it wasn't just Reddit, and I'm curious what else you found was worth your time, but how did you figure out that's where your potential community and potential users were spending time?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:11:06):
Well, I think over time Reddit became the place that you go to when you want peer answers, whether that peer is someone right next to you or someone halfway across the world. So it was a very obvious place for me to go to understand, what's top of mind for my audience? But also there are so many subreddits, whether it's founders or HR managers, that people are just asking their community. Because oftentimes they have very specific questions. You can't just ask that to Google because they have one thing that means that they might not be able to qualify for the exact solution that is what's most used out there. So Reddit just became the place over the years for people to ask their specific questions semi-anonymously and get answers from their community, and multiple answers to be able to judge which works better versus didn't. So it was one of the first places that myself and my team went to.

Lenny (00:11:58):
And is this something that worked really well, mostly at the beginning to kickstart growth or how early was this? And then how much of your growth would you say came from this sort of strategy early on?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:12:07):
I believe I set up that little keyword tracking within the first day of me starting my role at Deel. So it was very, very early. And we still do this by the way. We still provide answers across Reddit, Quora communities. We're still out there connecting with people. Over time, of course, it went from maybe being 15% of our funnel to less than 5% of our funnel because the rest of our funnel has grown a lot. But the next number of people that we get to share our solution with through those channels have continued to grow over time.

Lenny (00:12:43):
Coming back to something I asked that I want to touch on is, in today's world are there any cheaper growth channels that you are excited about? Or is it essentially the same idea? Look for where your potential users are and ideally asking questions that you could help answer? Is that roughly how you think about it still?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:12:58):
That is still roughly how I think about it. I would add social channels to that as well. I think Twitter's a great place, people ask questions oftentimes, so there are communities. And when someone has answered that question, other people piggyback off of that. But anywhere where someone is asking a question, I would consider to fall into this category of a cheap channel.

Lenny (00:13:17):
What's an example of answering a question in a value-add way versus a maybe less effective way in your experience?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:13:25):
I would say the least effective way would be, "Hey, we've solved that problem, check out our website." Okay, cool, if you have five seconds, do that. But the value-add way would be explaining what the solution to that problem is. Because the reality is there are a lot of people out there who can probably solve this, and then providing your solution, but answer their question first, and then let them decide if they want to come with you or go with someone else. But the whole point of someone asking a question isn't to be sold a solution. It's like, "I just need an answer." So genuinely treat this person like a friend of yours, answer their question, be like, "Yes, it's doable. No, it's not doable. Yes, you can do it, but you need to consider X, Y, Z. If you want to learn more about it, you can chat with us."

Lenny (00:14:04):
And these were people on the team or you answering these questions, it wasn't some automated system?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:14:09):
It was never automated. It still isn't today. We would never automate our interactions with people. So early days, it was myself, the other people on my team, our co-founders, which to this day they still do by the way. So it's a lot of people on the team. Every single person on the team has access to these. And whoever is the first person to jump in will flag it. And sometimes you'll see on a Twitter, someone will write a question, there's three people from Deel team has answered. We're like, "Okay, I think enough of us have provided value here."

Lenny (00:14:41):
That's amazing. And I'm spending a lot of time on this, but this is such an interesting and important tactic that clearly worked to help you all start and it's cheap. And most, at least B2B, companies could probably leverage this. So when people are thinking about where to go, maybe do this, you mentioned Twitter, maybe Reddit, maybe Quora. Is there anything else, just like the sphere of potential places founders can go think about whether maybe people are asking questions they could answer there?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:15:06):
Yeah, there are a lot of closed communities, so there are still ... they could be Slack communities, Discord, places that founders choose to connect with other founders. Or we have partnerships with places like the Y Combinator, where once you go through a certain program or you qualify to be in the club, whatever that club may be, you get to get access to this community where you can talk to other people. So those are considered closed communities. It's not as easy to gain access to. But if you can find a way to gain access to those communities, they're also great places to be.

Lenny (00:15:37):
And then step number one is add value, right?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:15:40):
Yes.

Lenny (00:15:40):
You can't just get in the community, "Hey, check out Deel everyone."

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:15:42):
Otherwise you'll just get kicked out. You can try not adding value, you're not going to last very long.

Lenny (00:15:47):
Yeah. If you think about the pie chart of how growth happened at Deel early on and then today, what would that roughly look like? What percentage of early growth came through this versus SEO or whatever else worked, and then today? Whatever you can share of where growth comes from.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:16:03):
Today, roughly about I would say 50% of our growth continues to come from what we would consider non-paid channels, through whether it be partnerships, SEO, these kinds of moderations. So early on that was more close to 80% to 90%. But that number has grown. Again, the net number has grown, but the percentage of the overall value has shrunk because other channels have also grown significantly.

Lenny (00:16:29):
Awesome. Okay. So let's talk about SEO. First of all, how important has that been to the success and growth of Deel? And then also just what have you learned about what is important to get SEO right?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:16:40):
Yeah. So I would say for SEO, the biggest mistake people make is they will just shove keywords. They're like, "Okay, these are the keywords people are searching for, I need to make sure I mention it five times." Obviously do that, make sure that the content that you wrote answers the question. But the main thing to think about it is, is the Google search over? If someone reads your content, if they typed in something to Google, and then they read the article that you've published, are they going back to Google to continue reading more or is the Google search over? Because ultimately that's what the search engines care about is, I want to make sure this person gets their answer quickest way possible.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:17:16):
So when you think from that perspective, it's much easier to actually write things that people want to read, and you're not just meandering and going on and on, shoving a bunch of keywords that people are just like, "I'm bored, I'm bouncing, I'm going somewhere else."

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:17:30):
So asking that question of, is the search over is a really good place to start, instead of just shoving keywords. And our content team is amazing. I would say they're more of an operational team than they are a creative team. The way they run things, the way they publish the articles, there's a very clear framework that is used to decide what gets published when and what doesn't get published by the same token. So all of those things are very important to consider, instead of just being like, "Oh, this keyword has 10,000 monthly visitors, I'm just going to write a bunch of things about that."

Lenny (00:18:02):
What's an example of a page that you wrote that ends people search and gives them what they need?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:18:07):
A lot of people wonder what an EOR is because that's an employer of record. They tend to be confused about exactly what that is. So we do very well in explaining to people what EOR is and isn't and what its limitations are. Because the first question that you will have after the EOR question's answered is, okay, what's the downside? When do I need to not use it? So for us, that's one of the content pieces that does very well.

Lenny (00:18:32):
I'd love to spend more time on this operational element of the SEO team. Maybe one question is just what is that bar that tells you that it's ready to publish and worth going out versus it's not ready?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:18:42):
Yes. So I can't take credit to this, this is all of our team's work. But we have this framework that we call the traffic light system. Essentially we go, whenever the team is going to do a content series, they will go and find up to 700 keywords. These are keywords that are related to what we do. So they might be closely related, they might be distant related. And then those set of keywords get ranked by highest volume to the lowest volume. So then you have an Excel sheet, keywords on the left, volume on the right. And then you go one by one. This does take time. And then say, what is the intent of someone searching this keyword?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:19:22):
Is this a university student looking to write an article and they're never going to become our customer? Or is this someone that is actually looking to solve their existing solution and they are going to become our customer? So with that, you get the green light ones, which is the intent is very high, this person wants our solution. The yellow light is intent, could be they are a 50:50, maybe they're looking to buy our solution, maybe it's not soon enough. And then the red is, this person is not looking to buy our solution, they're just doing this search for any other reason. So when you do that, then you go from the greens, highest volume to the lowest volume, yellows, highest volume to the lowest volume, and oftentimes you never get to the reds.

Lenny (00:20:03):
I love that. And then once you have say a keyword, say a green, I guess, it's a green keyword where it's high intent and high volume, what is the process to actually put together an article that works for SEO?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:20:16):
So step one is understanding the search intent. Why is someone typing that? What are they trying to understand? And a part of that is going to Google and figuring out, what is Google servicing today? So one of the examples that I always give people of when you type EOR into Google, it doesn't give you employer of record, it gives you enhanced oil recovery, because most of the people typing EOR to Google is looking for that solution.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:20:43):
Now, if my team blindly went in and said, "We're going to rank for EOR," we're never going to rank for that because that's not what Google gives people because that's not what people have been looking for. So first is understanding, what are people looking for? And creating a content piece that answers those questions. Oftentimes the bottom part of Google where it says, the next questions that you should be asking is a really good place to go to understand, okay, after someone's done with this search, what's the next question that they ask? And the next one and the next one.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:21:11):
So figuring out what do people want to get out of this? And then there are a myriad of SEO solutions tools that you can use out there to ensure that the content you've written is in a simple enough language that someone with a fifth grade reading level can understand. That you actually did the right things, you put the right keywords in the right places. I almost think of keywords as like, that's your address, that's how you give Google, please send people my way. So you can use many tools.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:21:38):
We use Clearscope, we love it. So those are the tools that you use. And then it gets published. And oftentimes those tools will give you a score to say you're an A plus or you're a C minus, you need to make your language less sophisticated, currently it's at university level and we need it to be at fourth grade reading level.

Lenny (00:21:55):
What is the structure of the content team at this point, how many people is it, and what are their rough focuses?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:22:00):
Fun fact about our content team, the person that leads it was one of the earliest employees at Deel, I want to say number two or three. So the person there is just so special to our entire company. And so the structure of the content team for us is, it is led by our director of content. We have one person that is in charge of all of the operations. So that is working with our freelancers, making sure that the briefs are sent out, making sure that the fact checking is done on time, that the articles are published on the website, and tracking and everything, they run the machinery on the backend.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:22:33):
And then we have different people focused on different areas of content because you need to have expertise that you build over time to write properly. So we have one person looking after certain product lines, another person would be focusing on [inaudible 00:22:46] behind different product lines. And very recently we've set out a team for different types of content because content isn't just written article, it's also video, it's also education. There's a lot of different types of content that we want to tap into. So now there's a team that is focused on those new mediums for us.

Lenny (00:23:04):
Awesome. So how many people total full-time that run this operation?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:23:08):
Right now the team is about eight people total.

Lenny (00:23:11):
And it's like, I don't know if it's exactly 50% of it, something like half of your growth essentially is coming from this team?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:23:17):
Yes.

Lenny (00:23:18):
Is there anything else you found that it's really important or effective for thinking about making SEO work?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:23:23):
The biggest mistake people make is SEO is one of those things that, you can try and automate it, you can do a lot of things that save you time, but it never stops being time-consuming. And to do it well, it is going to be time-consuming. So oftentimes people just get over it or they think it's below them to be going over and doing keyword research and doing all of those things one by one. And that's oftentimes where people lose out is they try to cut corners. And when you cut corners, you just don't create a good quality resource. That's what it comes down to. It's like, is your resource good quality? Yes or no?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:23:55):
So when you try to just be like, I want to rank and cut all those corners, your content is not going to be great. Nobody's going to want to read it. And your program is not going to go anywhere. So I think it's one of those things that people as they become more senior think it's below them. And I think that's the biggest mistake.

Lenny (00:24:11):
It's interesting, and that's exactly the same advice for writing a newsletter, the thing I do. Where if a newsletter isn't working, it usually means the content isn't valuable enough to people. It's such a clear meritocracy of, if it's useful, people will read it, subscribe, share. And if they're not, they won't subscribe. And then Google basically figures that out based on people's behavior.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:24:30):
Yes, exactly.

Lenny (00:24:31):
To give people a sense of the operation, how many articles are you putting out a month, a day, a week, whatever you can share there?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:24:38):
We used to put out about 10 articles a week, that's net new. Whereas now we are doing more of five new articles and five article updates. Because the type of content we write, regulations change, things change all the time, so we need to make sure that even if something was published two years ago, it's up-to-date. So we have a team that is responsible for continuously fact checking. So we do about five article updates and five net new articles written. And of course we do it across many different languages. So what started off as English only operations is now in other languages as well. So there's no shortage of work to go around.

Lenny (00:25:15):
Something that I go back and forth on a bit is, if SEO is something every company should be doing and will work for them? And in my experience, there's certain products that are really good for SEO, especially if there's user generated content or there's just a bunch of data like say Yelp or Glassdoor, where they can generate tons of pages in all these different ways. Do you have an opinion on what sort of business and company is best suited for SEO? Or is your feeling everyone should probably be doing SEO in some form? And even if it's not a huge part of your growth strategy, it'll help.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:25:47):
I don't think everybody should be doing SEO. I think if you are in a space where people are looking for a solution, you should be doing SEO. But if you are a direct to consumer company selling people lipstick, which I'm a huge buyer of, you probably shouldn't invest in SEO all that much because people don't go to Google for that. They go to Instagram, they go to influencers. And even if someone types in the best lipstick of 2023, chances of your website ranking, because you're not a third party objective comparing to other people, is very low. So it really depends on the solution. But if you are in a space which most B2B products tend to be, that you're solving an active problem very specifically, then I would say SEO is a good idea. If you're a consumer good, maybe a little bit less effort should be put towards it.

Lenny (00:26:39):
Makes a lot of sense. Going back to the early days, you were hired as head of growth at Deel, there's a lot of things you could do. I'm curious how you decided where to prioritize your resources and what to do in the early days? Versus what you started doing down the road and what you could almost not worry about early on? What have you learned about that early prioritization exercise?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:26:59):
Yes. So I would say early days, it's very important to just go back to the basics, build the skeleton before you put on the makeup. So the first question I would ask is, do you have a website? Is it fast? Do the search engine knows that it exists? Okay, great. The next step would be, can people find it? If they can't find it, you need to write content to make sure that people can find it.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:27:24):
Only after all of those questions are answered, should you then consider, do I have money? Can I put it behind some paid ads to make sure people come to my website? So going step-by-step. But you can't run a successful paid ads program if you have a website that's loading in four plus seconds. So really going back to the basics and starting from a good experience at the core. And then expanding step-by-step from there is how I would suggest everybody starts. And that's what I would do if I was to get hired all over again.

Lenny (00:27:54):
I love that. So what are some of the steps? So step one is, do you have a website? Step two is make sure the website performs and people can actually have a good time when they're experiencing it. I imagine part of it is also, do people understand what you do, like tweaking maybe the pitch and the [inaudible 00:28:07]

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:28:06):
Yes, exactly. And speaking of the pitch, our copy team does an amazing job at this. In the B2B world, it's very easy to come up with statements that could so easily be applied to another business and it would work just as well on their website. And it sounds good and you and your team feel really good about it. But then if your one-liner can also work for another business, please don't let that be your one-liner. Make it so that people actually understand what you do. Because right now there's a lot of statements out there like, 'we do the complex things so you can focus on what you do best', what does that mean? And you can give that to 90% of the B2B businesses out there and it would apply to them, which means it's not good enough.

Lenny (00:28:51):
Is there anything that you remember you changed in those early days in terms of the website or the positioning or anything along those lines that was a big improvement?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:28:57):
Our website was hard coded, so the first thing we did with the help of the dev team was to move it to a platform that it was easy for me to access and edit, so that we could continuously A/B test things. And outside of that, we worked really hard on testing a lot of value propositions to explain to people exactly what we do, explain problem first, solution first, and time savings, cost savings, putting a lot of those against each other and rapidly A/B testing.

Lenny (00:29:24):
Once you got past that phase, where maybe you started doing some paid ads and other things, where did you find you could invest more resources?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:29:32):
Once we covered the basics of your big four or five ad platforms, we started looking into the long tail places. So those are the platforms that individually never contribute a significant enough chunk for you to individually care about it. But if you add them up, it diversifies your lead flow such that it ends up being about 30% of your overall lead flow that's coming in. Those could be things like review sites or much smaller outlets that could also run ads, newsletter ads, podcast ads, all of those things.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:30:06):
When you run an individual podcast ad, yeah, you're probably not going to get 2000 customers from one podcast. But you run 10 of those and then it starts adding up. So really long tail is where we focused on. And we started going very niche with websites that have maybe 50,000, a hundred thousand visitors a month, which isn't all that much when you're thinking about your paid ad strategy. But all of those places add up and they're oftentimes overlooked because they're not as easy, you have to take the time to set up from scratch to run it on everything. Our paid ads team, they spent just as much time running Facebook and Google ads as they do running those third party, much smaller platform ads. It takes the same effort, but you need to have a diversified source of your leads.

Lenny (00:30:54):
Huge fan of podcast ads over here, and maybe this would be a good time to cue the mid-roll ad, maybe, I don't know, it happens.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:30:59):
Sounds perfect.

Lenny (00:31:01):
Here we go. Today's episode is brought to you by AssemblyAI. If you're looking to build AI powered features in your audio and video products, then you need to know about AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to transcribe and understand speech at scale. What I love about AssemblyAI is you can use their simple API to access the latest AI breakthroughs from top tier research labs. Product teams and startups and enterprises are using AssemblyAI to automatically transcribe and summarize phone calls and virtual meetings, detect topics in podcasts, pinpoint when sensitive content is spoken and lots more.

Lenny (00:31:36):
All of AssemblyAI's models, which are accessed through their API, are production ready. So many PMs I know are considering or already building with AI and AssemblyAI is the fastest way to build with AI for audio use cases. Now is the time to check out AssemblyAI, which makes it easy to bring the highest accuracy transcription plus valuable insights to your customers, just like Spotify, CallRail and Writer do for theirs. Visit assemblyai.com/lenny to try their API for free and start testing their models with their no-code playground. That's assemblyai.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:32:12):
And welcome back. Speaking of podcast ads, something that I find is with that sort of advertising, there's a direct response component of like, we will drive leads as running an ad like this, and there's also a awareness, brand building component. I know you're not a big fan of awareness campaigns and marketing campaigns, especially early on, and so I'd love to get your perspective on why that is and how you think about that sort of investment?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:32:36):
I'm not a huge fan of early awareness campaigns for B2B businesses specifically. So if you are a consumer goods founder, you can skip this part. But the reason I don't like awareness early on is because to do a proper awareness campaign, it takes time. You need to have teams that are doing the strategy, doing the creative work, and they don't always hit. You don't know if they're always going to resonate or not. And then you look back, and you've worked on this thing for a whole month and it hasn't resonated and you've wasted a full month.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:33:07):
Because B2B businesses uniquely are started because there's a very real need and there's a lot of people that are ready to convert, first tap into the bottom of the funnel, and then go out and start speaking to the masses. But I promise you it'll probably take you six to eight months minimum to tap into that bottom of the funnel of people that are ready to convert today before you have to start doing awareness ads out there. That's not to say never do awareness ads, but it's oftentimes the shiny, cool thing that you want to do and it just ends up being a waste of time early on. Because people don't really even understand what you're doing, you haven't really even figured out what's the messaging that resonates, but you've done this creative campaign and people are like, "This looks cool, but I'm just going to go ahead and continue looking for a solution for my problem."

Lenny (00:33:53):
Is there an example of a marketing campaign or an awareness campaign that comes to mind that you thought was like, "Okay, this is ... if you do it this way, maybe it's worth doing"?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:34:01):
I've seen Notion do a great job with their out-of-home ads. They didn't do it early on, they started doing it much later in their journey by the time when everybody that was working in tech knew what it was, and it was really to drive home the message continuously rather than to introduce themselves to the world. So by then when you saw that layout on a billboard, it made sense, you're like, "Oh, I know what they're talking about."

Lenny (00:34:23):
So what is it about Notion that you think was great, it was timing and then also the actual ad itself you thought was great?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:34:30):
Yeah, the ads that I'm recalling right now were showcasing their product interface. So they needed enough time, and this is my obviously hypothesis, if someone from Notion wants to jump in and say that wasn't the reason why we did this, go ahead, but I think they needed enough time for people to get familiar with the interface. Because Notion has a very specific interface that when you see it, you recognize it, it's not like any other product. So unless people built that awareness and recognition, doing an out-of-home ad with that layout wouldn't have made much sense because just with that layout they were able to communicate what product they're talking about. If they did that day one, people would be like, "What is this thing that I'm looking at?"

Lenny (00:35:07):
So we've been working through all the ways that Deel has grown, we've talked about SEO, community, you mentioned partnerships. Is there anything interesting there to mention around just what partnerships have done?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:35:18):
Yeah, I would say it is very important to know who you should partner with. So there's two groups of partners. People oftentimes end up partnering with any company that has a shared audience. Decent place to start. But just because you share an audience doesn't mean your audience goes to your partner for guidance when they have this problem.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:35:35):
So in our case, venture capital partners was a huge one because when you get money from a new VC, they ask, they're like, "Okay, thank you for giving us this money, now we want to expand our team with the money you gave us. What are your other portfolio companies using? What is a platform that you trust that you would recommend?" So people go to their VCs for that kind of question. But there might be another tech company out there that is tapping into the exact audience that we are, but people never go to them to ask that question. So our partnership with them will likely not work just as well. So it's important to not only recognize the importance of an audience overlap as well as whether or not those people are seen as a trusted resource for the solution you are putting out there.

Lenny (00:36:16):
I really love this idea you keep coming back to, which is where are people asking this question that you can help them answer. And to make that even more concrete for people, what are some other examples maybe of questions people ask that Deel can help them with? So that it could help people think about, okay, maybe our product can help them answer these other sorts of questions

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:36:35):
Since the early days, and it continues to happen, compliance is a huge question that gets asked. So when you are an HR leader or a finance leader or a legal leader in a company that works let's say in America, but you want to hire someone in another country, you don't know what you don't know. So it's very important to have people that know what they're talking about in context of your country of origin as well as the country that you're trying to hire from. So compliance has always been a huge part of what we did and what we've always answered for people. That's why we have in-house experts that answer those questions, that constantly provide updates if the answer to that question has changed over time, which regulations constantly change. An answer we provided a week ago may change, and you need to be very proactive in communicating that.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:37:18):
Taxes is another one, especially in the space that we're in, payroll, hiring. Taxes change from country to country. You need to know when you need to pay what taxes, when you need to not pay them, and what types of work people do. So those are some of the types of questions that get asked.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:37:34):
So for us, they're very nitty-gritty and use case specific. The taxes you need to pay for someone who is an engineer that's a full-time employee might be very different than who is a designer who is a contractor. So those are the kinds of specifics that we get into with people.

Lenny (00:37:50):
Got it. So it's like, how do I pay taxes for an engineer I'm hiring in Turkey? And then you give them, "Here's the answer," and then it's like, "If you just want us to take care of it for you, then go check out Deel."

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:37:59):
Exactly. Rarely the question is what's the best payroll solution? It's like, okay, that's good to make sure what you're leaning towards isn't shit and that other people agree with you. But ultimately it was like you need the best payroll solution because you need to make sure that things aren't going to go wrong.

Lenny (00:38:15):
Speaking of answering questions in content, something that you told me is that you wrote a blog post that the IRS ended up linking to as the definitive answer to a question. And I don't think this was at Deel, but can you share that story?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:38:28):
Yes, actually it was at my previous role. And the person who wrote that article is today at Deel. So he came over to join us there too. But yes, it was right around when Covid happened and the US government rolled out the PPP program. And there was a lot of questions about, do I qualify? If I qualify, how do I apply for this?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:38:51):
And at the time the company that I was working for had a lot of customers that were like, "What do I do? I need to gain access to this, but I don't know what to do." So the team there took the time to truly understand how the system works, whether you qualify, what to do. And created this resource for our own customers because we just wanted to help them. And then it ended up being such a good resource that it was linked from the IRS's website being like, "If you have questions, check out this article," which was a great moment of pride. And it just went to show that when you do your best to answer questions and other people don't have the time to do it, no matter who it is, they're going to send people back your way. And it was at the time, it happened to be a big moment of growth.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:39:33):
It was a very unfortunate instance, we wish we never had to write that, that it never happened. But yeah, that was the story around IRS linking to the company's resource.

Lenny (00:39:44):
That's the ultimate sign of the question is answered and you're done with it, the IRS decides to link to it. So you're saying that was actually a big driver of growth, IRS traffic. I'm curious how many people actually go read that?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:39:57):
So that was huge for that short duration of a few week time when people were trying to apply for PPP. And then it died out, as did PPP.

Lenny (00:40:05):
Makes sense. One last question around paid, and then I want to move on to a different topic. Is there anything you've learned about what it takes to be successful at paid growth from your experience at Deel?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:40:15):
Yeah, so a few things. Our paid team spends a lot of time on both the messaging aspect of things as well as the optimization. So optimization is the technical way in which you set your bids, make sure that you don't go over budget, whether or not you can afford that.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:40:31):
And then messaging is making sure that if someone sees your ad, whether it's on Instagram, Twitter, Google, that it makes sense for them. So creative fatigue is a real thing. When you put an ad out there that works for three weeks, people get tired of seeing that, you need to constantly update that. So our paid team is actually updating the ads we put out there on a monthly basis with the exception of a few Google ads, which need to be straight to the point. So staying ahead of creative fatigue. Making sure that your messaging also keeps up with your product, even if the ad is working really well, you need to make sure that as your product has evolved, so has the messaging alongside that.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:41:07):
And also recognizing, not just looking at the amount of leads that you generated from a campaign, but how many of them actually became a client, and how much money did you actually make from those clients to understand things around payback. Because oftentimes marketers just tend to think about, "Oh, this is a great lead channel and I get so many leads from it." But then you ask that question to sales teams and they're like, "Yeah, I'm busy, but none of these are converting." So it's really important to look at not just the volume that you bring in, but what is the journey of that volume with your business one year out. How much money do you actually make from them to be able to properly decide how much can I spend to win this customer?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:41:44):
And the way that we've done it is we've worked with our data team to set up a dashboard that tracks that in real time. We know an average customer that comes from a Facebook ad, at what rate do they converge from a lead to a qualified opportunity to a closed on.? And then on average, how much money do we make from that customer one year out. So that we can decide, is this a worthy channel for us, do we not want to invest there or are we reaching that peak and we can't continue to invest there.

Lenny (00:42:11):
Something that I should mention as we talk through this is we're talking about all these ways to grow the product, but at the core is a great product that people actually find valuable and want to keep using. And maybe a question there is just how that plays into this whole growth strategy, actually making the product something people want versus all these acquisition channels?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:42:29):
Acquisition channels just straight up don't work if you have a product that doesn't live up to the expectation. I think I personally have been very spoiled and lucky because from the day I joined Deel, the product was top-notch. As I was joining an early stage company, I joined right after series A, I was expecting certain things to be duct taped in the back, it happens. And I was like, "Oh no, the engineers and the product team are, if they say a product can do something, it can do that and more."

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:42:59):
So early days of my team pitching Deel was people were like, "I don't think you guys can do all of that. I don't believe you." And it was almost like we had to tamper down our messaging so that people would believe us. But you can be the best marketer in the world, if when people come to your product, even if your sales team does a good job at convincing them to become a customer, because you can do that, if the product doesn't live up to the expectations, especially in the B2B world where people aren't going to put up with crappy products, they're going to leave. That's going to get out and people are going to know it's not a worthy product. So that really sits at the core of everything that we do.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:43:35):
I think it's very easy to take it for granted when you're at a company that has an awesome product, you're like, "It is like this all the time." But one of the things I would encourage anybody looking to join a young company is, ask them what their team breakdown looks like. When I joined Deel, most of the team was product and engineers. So that told me that the core of this business was going to be solid. And then we built out those supporting things like marketing, like sales, like data to surround the product. But if you are talking to an early stage company that's a B2B product and they have six salespeople and two engineers, their product probably isn't going to be great for that much longer.

Lenny (00:44:12):
Especially if it's an outsourced dev shop doing the product, they're like, "Oh, they'll take care of the product, we'll just sell it." Something else that I think is important to talk about is Covid was an important element of your growth. And so I guess, one, is that true? And then two, just what did you lean into and lean out of in terms of growth during Covid to help people discover Deel when they needed it most, which is basically people going remote in a lot of ways in a lot of companies?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:44:39):
So Covid, actually a lot of people think Deel was started as a response to the pandemic, we actually got started before the pandemic and then the pandemic happened. So as sad as it was, it did force people into a pilot program of the vision that we had for the world. It forced people to work remotely, whether that means you're working remotely from someone who lives a block away from you or you are working remotely from someone in Germany. So we did benefit from the fact that everybody was at least forced to test out this hypothesis of, does it work to not be in the same room as the people that you're working with?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:45:17):
And one of the questions that we were getting early on as the Covid was coming to an end was, "Are you worried, Covid is coming to an end, that people aren't going to use Deel anymore?" And our response to that has always been, we are not a remote work platform, we're a global work platform. So a lot of these businesses have gone back into offices. We have a lot of customers that asked people to go back to their offices, but now they have offices in Germany and in Canada and in the US and in France. So we were never a remote work company, we were just a global work company.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:45:49):
And remote work, because there was a lot of news coverage happening around it, we just became synonymous with that. So I do think early on we did benefit from being able to provide that solution. And a lot of people saw the reality of like, "Hey, I work just as well with this person as I did when I was in an office with them. Well, the best person that I'm looking for, the job may not be within my region, so let me go ahead and hire them regardless of where they are." People got comfortable with that and more and more companies started moving in that direction.

Lenny (00:46:20):
And is there anything that ended up being really important in terms of helping Deel grow through that? Like a channel that's just like, "Let's go big on this channel because it seems to be working really well"? Or is it just word of mouth basically and people are just like, "Oh shit, I really need to solve this problem, my hair's on fire, what's out there? Let me go find an answer"?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:46:36):
I wouldn't say it was word of mouth, maybe very, very early on it was word of mouth, but within the first few months of our operation that stopped being true. Or at least the word of mouth stopped being a smaller percentage of the way in which people discover us. But it's always that people needed a payroll solution, they needed a way to hire independent contractors overseas, and we just were the answer to that. So we consistently put ourselves in front of them and said, "Hey, if you're trying to do this, or if you're already doing it and you're not doing it legally, we can help you do that legally."

Lenny (00:47:10):
I want to chat about team building, something that I've heard you're exceptional at. And my first question is, early on when you were building the team, the growth team specifically, at Deel, what skills did you find were most important to look for? And what skills and experiences did you find wasn't as important early on that you could sacrifice and wait until later to get?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:47:30):
Early on one of the first questions I would ask people is, what are the KPIs that you're willing to commit to? So if someone's only willing to commit to lead numbers, that's not good enough. They need to be able to commit to closed one revenue KPRs to really show that they care about the business's bottom line. So it was those people that were willing to commit to the full funnel.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:47:53):
And also oftentimes people tend to hire from the big companies that they want to become like because the brand name is appealing. But if you're a team of 35 people, and you're trying to hire the director of whatever from a huge company, you need to ask the question of, when did this person join that huge company? Did they join when the company was already 5,000 people and from day one they had all the resources at their disposal? Or were they actually one of the earlier employees who helped that growth? Because oftentimes the mistake I see people make is they'll hire someone from an amazing company that have accomplished amazing things, but they're not used to operating with 10% of the resources that they had. So they're not willing to get down and do the dirty work.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:48:35):
And at Deel we have this concept called 'little hands'. I think it's loosely translated from French, someone can correct me on that. But it basically means that no matter who you are, where you sit within the organization, you need to be willing to get into the little things and do the nitty-gritty work and not shy away from it. And it's very important too, whoever we hire at any level, it's like, "Are you willing to do the tiniest of jobs?" And if the answer is yes, that's great. And some people are like, "I would build a team for that." And of course in the future, maybe you should, but that shouldn't be your first answer. Your first answer should be, "Yes, of course I'll do that." And if someone's not excited about that, then they're not a good fit for at least a company at our stage right now.

Lenny (00:49:18):
That is an amazing expression, little hands. You talked about how you check that people are willing to commit to revenue goals. Is that in the interview or is that ... how do you ... because won't everyone just say, "Yeah, yeah, I can commit to anything you need me to commit to, I'm going to go make this work"? How do you get a sense if they're the kind of person that would do that?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:49:38):
It happens within the interview process. So one ways to find out is what are the KPIs that they have committed to in the past in their roles. So if they've never committed to a revenue goal or a bottom funnel goal and they're saying they're willing to commit to it, that's probably not correct. And I always say, if they haven't, I say, "What are the KPIs that you have today and what are the KPIs that you think you should have?" Because sometimes they're just not given those, but they still think they should have been given the more bottom funnel. So that's something that I would look for in the interview process.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:50:06):
And a really good way to also test for that is, this is more on the case study process, but asking someone to come up with a strategy with $0, with $10,000 and maybe a hundred thousand dollars to see if they're going to be able to scale with you. And to see how are they thinking about with different levels of spend and what are they willing to commit to at different levels of spend. Because if someone's throwing up their hands and saying, "At $0, I can only do social media monitoring, we're not going to get much because that's what makes sense." Well, you probably know that they're not going to be comfortable committing to those bottom of funnel metrics until you give them all the resources that they need.

Lenny (00:50:46):
And it sounds like the way you goal teams within Deel also is revenue, growth teams basically have revenue goals. It's not, like you said, leads or traffic or anything like that.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:50:55):
Yes. That's why we're called growth instead of marketing, we care about the revenue growth. And of course we track leads and SQLs. Those are leading indicators to know whether or not we're going to hit the ultimate number that we all care about. But at the end of the day, that's not what we consider success.

Lenny (00:51:12):
In terms of team structure, how you thought about structuring the early growth team, what did that look like and what was the reporting lines and buckets of investment?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:51:21):
Yeah, so very early on, we always seek to bring in one leader to manage a part of the organization and then let them grow their teams. We don't love the idea of hiring people based off of a hypothesis that something is going to work. That's a really good way to have to do layoffs because the plans you thought were going to work didn't work. So we always hired one person, prove out a theory, and then let them grow their team.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:51:43):
So the first hire we made to the team was actually a product marketing person. To this day they lead our product marketing team, and they were the ones who sit between the product team and the go-to-market teams and really set the messaging. And quickly we realized this person needs more help in setting the messaging, the tone. So then the second person we hired was a very talented copywriter. And that person today leads our creative teams.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:52:08):
And then the third person we actually hired onto the growth team was a data analyst because the sentiment was we're not willing to spend a dollar if we don't know where that money's going and what it's doing for us. Which a lot of people would assume that's a very early hire for ... data is too early to hire as number three. But I still think that we did the right thing there. Now we have a whole data team, but back then we didn't.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:52:32):
So those were the three teams that we started with on top. And then the content person was already at Deel by the time that I joined, so that was the person I mentioned that was early employee. So that's how we originally set it.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:52:45):
Now the teams have changed. So now we have a different structure, slightly different structure, which is we have regional teams and functional teams. The functional teams are basically subject matter experts. They're good at what they do and we don't care where they are based in the world. So those are teams like product marketing, content, community, events, paid advertisements, brand. If we are looking for the best graphic designer in the world, I don't care where they are, they can sit wherever in the world. They are basically functional teams.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:53:16):
And then we have regional teams. Because we are selling into a lot of different regions, we need to make sure that we have local expertise as well. So we have marketing managers for different key regions for us that then work with our functional teams to bring the strategy to life. So that's how we've set it.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:53:33):
I've seen businesses who build out a regional team that has their own paid ads team and their own content team. But what we have found is when you take people away from their group of expertise, so if you take a paid ads person, and if you have a team of paid ads people and you separate those five people and give them to different regions, instead of letting them sit together and be a tight team, the best practice is learning and the leveling up of the skills doesn't happen as fast as they would if all of the technical roles are sitting together. So we are continuing down the road of functional and regional setup.

Lenny (00:54:09):
So say someone in Turkey wants to run paid ads, they convince the paid growth team to invest in resources in growing Turkey?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:54:16):
Exactly. So they would work with our central paid ads team to say I would like to run paid ads in Turkey, this is the audience I want to go after. And then they work together to execute on that strategy.

Lenny (00:54:28):
How does that team decide who's going to get their time, is there a rough approach to that?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:54:32):
So it depends on the total addressable market in a region, what are the opportunities we're seeing, what's the competitive landscape like. So chances are if a market is what we consider to be tier one, and it's a place that we have seen good growth, we will invest our resources into it. And then along the way we learn and we decide if we're going to double down or pull back a little bit.

Lenny (00:54:53):
Awesome. I want to chat a bit about culture, culture at Deel. We had Jeff from Ramp on, and their culture is described by one word, velocity. Also one of you being the fastest growing business of all time, I'm curious how you'd contrast your culture and broadly how you think about culture at a startup and how you help create the culture at Deel?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:55:12):
Yeah, so I would say culture is made up of two components. One is, what do you bring to the company as a team member, and what does the company give back to you? So what we expect the team members to bring to us is, our version of velocity is something that we call 'Deel speed', is that we want to make sure that we act with urgency. It doesn't matter how big the team has grown, we want to act with urgency on behalf of our customers. If a customer has a problem, they're not going to wait two weeks to get an answer for that. They're going to get that answer within 24 hours. If we need to build out a product because many customers are asking for it, that product is going to get built in one-tenth the time that any of our competitors will likely build it in.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:55:51):
So 'Deel speed' is very, very important for us. And that's something we expect from our team members who are committing to it. To say, what's the quickest way I can solve this problem properly? And to repeatedly push themselves to act with urgency.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:56:06):
We also care that we remain positive. We have default optimism because we are in a new space, so if someone's going to come into Deel and they're going to be pessimistic and they're like, "I don't think that's going to work for X, Y, Z reasons," they're going to just slow things down. We need people to ask the question of, "I think it's going to work for these four reasons, now let's see what are the risks associated with it and let's seek to solve those risks." That's again something we expect from our team members.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:56:31):
And then the last one, well, not the last one, but one of the third important ones is, fully giving a shit about your customer. At the end of the day, the product that we have, we are dealing with humans, we're dealing with their livelihood, the way they get paid, we're dealing with the way companies hire. It's so incredibly personal if someone doesn't get their paycheck on time or if someone gets into legal trouble because their contract wasn't set up the proper way.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:56:57):
So recognizing that it's not a software and a platform that we're trying to make it the best, but it's like, no, it's a business trying to pay a human so they can live their lives and the business can continue growing. So that care is something that we need people to bring to the table.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:57:14):
Now in return of those things coming, what we give back as a company is, outside of obviously your pay, your benefits package, et cetera, is we offer people the flexibility to choose how and when they do their job, they get to decide on where they work from, what hours they work. So we basically give people all the freedom to set up their life how they want to as long as they come to the table giving us what they need. So I would say we do have an intense culture, and that's expected, we share that openly with people. But at the end of the day, that's also what sets us apart.

Lenny (00:57:48):
I love this 'Deel speed'. Are these core values basically within Deel, these are values that you come back to?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:57:54):
Yes, exactly. And these are values that we publicly share as well.

Lenny (00:57:58):
How early in the lifecycle of the company did you all come up with these values? That's something that a lot of startups think about is, when should we actually crystallize these values?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:58:06):
So we came up with them, I believe it was about a year in, but we didn't sit around the table and say, "What should we call our values?" 'Deel speed' was something that our CEO would tell people. He'd be like, "Okay, I want you to do this, but I want you to do it at 'Deel speed'." And one of the early jokes was, let's have company swag that's Deel speedo and things like that. It's just like, it was already used so frequently with people that we were just like, "Okay, we keep saying this, let's also define what it actually is for us and set it in stone and share it with people." So we did go through that exercise probably about a year in into the company existing, but the culture happened well before we established that.

Lenny (00:58:49):
Reminds me, at Airbnb, there was a team that came up with the core values, I think it was four years in probably, and there were six of them. And then a few years later they realized two of them aren't actually true, they were aspirational. And there was this recognition that values should be who you are not who you hope to be because it just doesn't click. And so they actually cut those values and they ended up having just four values. And maybe one day they'll bring them back. And so I think that's a really good lesson is you want to see who you already are and then just represent them in a really interesting, creative way.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:59:22):
Yes, exactly.

Lenny (00:59:23):
There's a version of, what did you call it, default optimism. Airbnb's version of that was 'embrace the adventure', which is just like, this is going to be crazy, just go for it, embrace it, this is what it's going to be like.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (00:59:38):
Exactly. And try and see how can I solve this, how can this be done instead of why it won't work.

Lenny (00:59:43):
Yeah, I love that. And this urgency piece comes up again and again in these interviews I'm doing. What I think of is Frank Slootman, I think is his name, the founder of Snowflake, has this book called Amp It Up. All about just how they made Snowflake work. And something he comes back to is just you need to constantly have a sense of urgency because when you don't, people get bored and they actually end up liking their job less because it's just like, I don't really know what I'm doing, things are moving along. And there's actually a lot of value in moving fast. Jeff talked about this as just like, you have less burnout when people feel like things are getting done and out the door.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:00:18):
Yeah, it's incredibly fulfilling. I look back and sometimes things when, for example, when the SVB was going through the issues they were going through, the entire team had to work on a Sunday to communicate with our customers of like, "No, we're good, don't worry about it." But I remember that Sunday I had to miss out on a theater I was so excited to see, but it just felt like, oh my God, we're in this, it was like a war room, we're doing it. And that felt good. I didn't necessarily show up on Monday feeling already burned out, but it was more like, yes, I felt alive. And I think the right people will feel that way.

Lenny (01:00:52):
Yeah, and as long as it's not constantly for years just endless late nights and weekends.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:01:01):
It can't always be war time.

Lenny (01:01:01):
I find that those end up being the most memorable, meaningful moments is when you're working really, really hard on something that you're excited about. And it has to be something you're excited about and are proud of.

Lenny (01:01:10):
Last question. I saw on Twitter, you shared this photo of your home office, and it was this incredible view out the window, and then you took a photo facing your desk and it was an ironing board. And two questions there. One is just how did that all happen? And then two, I think you mentioned somewhere that you didn't even meet a lot of your coworkers for a year and a half after joining Deel, it was very remote forward. So, I'm curious also just how you made remote work work for you in that environment?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:01:36):
Yeah, so I'll explain the ironing board first. So that was because I was actually visiting my family in Istanbul, and in the setup that we have, there's one desk. So my husband and I go rock, paper, scissors, and we'll see who gets the desk and who gets to come up with a secondary solution. And he won the desk, so I had to come up with a creative solution. And because the view behind me was stunning, of the Bosporus, every meeting I joined, people were like, "Wow, I love your view, this is amazing." And I was like, "Oh, no, no, you guys, I'm sitting on an ironing board right now." And to me that was both funny, and I wanted to do a reality check with people to be like, "Come on, this is not as glorious as it looks." But at the same time, it really in that moment I was like, "This is awesome, I work at Deel."

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:02:22):
Previously when I wanted to go visit my family in Istanbul, and I live in Canada, I would have to use my days off to go. And for me it just meant a lot to be able to do my work regardless of where I am. I had a full day of work and meetings and everything. And my work just continued and I was also be able to be with my family. So it was a moment of Deel's promise coming true in a very real way in my life. And I thought it was hilarious. My dad thought it was so unprofessional that I shared that with the public then. He hasn't fully wrapped his head around the startup world. So it was just one of those moments of sharing that, yeah, work can be remote and it can be whatever you want it to be. So that's the the story behind it. In this moment as we're recording this, I am in a proper home office with a desk and a back supported chair. It changes all the time.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:03:16):
And in terms of, going back to your second question of, early days not meeting the team members. As I said, I joined Deel in July, 2020, pandemic was at its peak, me being based in Canada, Canada had very strict restrictions of, you can't leave the country, we won't let you back in. So I had to stay put. And I worked for a year and a half at Deel before for the first time where I met our team members was at a conference in Lisbon. And I showed up and it was this surreal moment because I've worked with them for a year and a half, we'd accomplished so much. Our revenue was already way past $50 million and I was seeing these people for the first time. So that was very funny.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:03:58):
But if I look at the early days of Deel, there's a lot of little stories like that, where we forgot to create swag until we reached a billion dollars. And it was actually when our photo was going to be on the NASDAQ and we wanted to take a team picture that we were like, "Guys, we need to have t-shirts. Can someone please run to a store in New York and print our logo on something?" So a lot of those things just by the nature of being a pandemic business came a little bit later.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:04:25):
But the thing that allowed I think for me in Deel to build the culture early on was, because we all work from home, we've been like that from day one. We have the option to go into WeWorks and co-working spaces if that's something that you choose. But we all get to show up as our very authentic selves. So people have met my pets and my partner well before they would have if I was showing up to an office. So there's that sincerity that comes with being in someone's home that we really relied on early on.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:04:56):
And as a company, I never felt the pressure to show up in a certain way or dress up for meetings or anything. So just being able to show up as yourself, and whether you're an introverted person who never likes to turn on their camera or you're someone who's going to be like, "Here, meet my dog." That just naturally built a team culture and comradery well before we could be together in person.

Lenny (01:05:20):
Clearly it has worked out. Meltem, is there anything else that you want to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:05:26):
We had a really good conversation. The one thing I would tell people is, most of growth, people assume is very difficult. I'm not necessarily saying it's easy, but it's relatively straightforward when you go back to the first principles of just figuring out where are the people at? How can I add value? As long as your product is there to actually bring them value. So I would say people should just recognize that it's much simpler than they think it is, it just takes a lot of discipline to execute on it, it's not rocket science.

Lenny (01:06:01):
Quite an empowering statement, I love it. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:06:07):
I am ready, let's do this.

Lenny (01:06:09):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:06:13):
From the nonfiction world, How Will You Measure Your Life by Clay Christensen, that's one I recommend. He takes the business learnings that he's had and applies it to your life. It's a very short and easy to get through book. Outside of that, I constantly recommend fiction. I think at one point it became uncool to read fiction that every moment you have needs to be productive and you need to learn something. I don't care what fiction it is you read, you can read Judy Blume for all I care, but just read fiction, be creative, do something with your brain other than reading nonfiction and learning things all the time.

Lenny (01:06:48):
I've had to make that shift myself, and it's been great, but I still get drawn to nonfiction. But good reminder. What are some favorite recent movie or TV shows you've loved?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:06:58):
Favorite recent movie, I think along with everybody else, was Oppenheimer. I thought it was great. I do wish they explored a little bit more of why he was the person that drove everybody to excellence. But overall loved the movie. Did not think I could sit through three hours without peeing, but I did. And favorite recent TV show was The Summer I Turned Pretty. I absolutely love it. I don't care that it's actually designed for teenagers, I enjoyed every second of it.

Lenny (01:07:28):
What is a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates when you're interviewing them?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:07:28):
What would your siblings say about you? It's very telling. If they have siblings, if they don't, I will say, what will your parents say about you? But it's very telling what you think other people think of you.

Lenny (01:07:41):
What do you look for in their answer that gives you a sign that they're a good candidate or not?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:07:45):
I look for sincerity and self-awareness. Your siblings are never ... I mean, I love my sister, but she'll probably shit talk me a lot. And being aware of that is very important. If someone was like, "My siblings will say I'm very organized and that I'm the one that brings our family together." That's probably a bullshit answer. But if they're like, "Oh yeah, they'll say these weird things about me," that shows a little bit of self-awareness and humbleness that I want to see in a person.

Lenny (01:08:11):
What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:08:14):
Oh, this is a dangerous one. So two, one was NuStrips, they're caffeine strips. I find caffeine pills and everything or when I drink coffee is like, accidentally I'll have 300 milligrams and then I'm buzzing. But these are 50 milligrams each, so it's very easy to stop yourself. And they don't taste bad. So those I like for when I just need a little boost.

Lenny (01:08:32):
So they're just strips that you put in your mouth and they give you caffeine?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:08:32):
Like LISTERINE strips.

Lenny (01:08:36):
What?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:08:37):
And you put it on your tongue and then it also doesn't give you the jitters and it's just 50 milligrams, which is a very mild cup of coffee.

Lenny (01:08:45):
Microdosing caffeine.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:08:46):
Exactly.

Lenny (01:08:47):
Beautiful.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:08:48):
And the second one is, I recently was gifted a personalized library stamp, which I love. Because I love to give books away, so I stamp them with my library stamp. And I like to think that one day in a secondhand bookshop I'm going to run into it.

Lenny (01:09:03):
That's amazing. There's a camp at Burning Man that's a library, and you can borrow books and you have to return it in a year, the next year when you come back to Burning Man. Which is amazing. And then there's a guy that has a megaphone, he is just like, "A book has been returned." Makes a whole scene about it. What is a favorite life motto that you often come back to or share with other people, either at work or in life?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:09:27):
The world is run by insecure overachievers. I used to think my insecurity was a downfall and I would just hide it and try to pretend it's not there. And then someone that I really look up to told that to. I'm like, "Okay, so I'm not the only one." And it's just, I do think world is run by a bunch of people that have something to prove for a good reason or not, but it's better to embrace it than to pretend you're all confident and you're just doing this because you're brilliant.

Lenny (01:09:54):
Oh my God, so good. Final question, what is your favorite Canadian food? You live in Canada and thus the question.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:10:02):
Okay, it's not particularly food, but Caesars, they're basically Bloody Mary's with clam juice.

Lenny (01:10:08):
Oh, Bloody Caesar, is that what they're called? Or just Caesar?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:10:10):
They're called Caesars.

Lenny (01:10:11):
Just Caesar.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:10:12):
But the American equivalent would be a Bloody Mary. It's so much better than a Bloody Mary. It's not vegan. And then the reason I qualify it as food is when you order it in Canada, it comes with pepperoni strips and pickled asparagus, and they'll shove a whole meal in there. And it's just amazing and something that America should definitely adapt too.

Lenny (01:10:28):
I think I've had one, I think I prefer Bloody Marys, but a good pitch for the Caesars. Meltem, thank you so much for being here. We talked about growth strategy, team building, 'Deel speed', default optimism, so many things. Really appreciate you making the time. Two final questions, where can folks find you online if they want to reach out? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:10:49):
So they can reach out to me on Twitter at MeltemK, I'm the fastest to respond there. Please don't reach out to me on LinkedIn, I never respond there. And the way readers can be useful to me is if they, one, we're always looking for feedback on Deel. If you see something out there that you think could be better, let me know, and I'll make sure to communicate it to the team, whatever that may be. And also, if anybody has tips that they think I would benefit from or any good fiction book recommendations, I'm always open to them.

Lenny (01:11:19):
Amazing. Meltem, thank you again so much for being here.

Meltem Kuran Berkowitz (01:11:23):
Thank you so much for having me.

Lenny (01:11:25):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny (00:03):
Merci Grace has been a founder, an investor, head of growth at Slack, and now a founder again. She's also one of the co-founders of Women in Product, which, if you listen to this podcast, you know I'm a huge fan of. In our conversation we cover what she's learned from her time helping Slack build a product team and figure out growth, how Slack innovated the concept of product-led growth and scale it to become one of the biggest B2B companies in the world, the most common mistakes companies make when going product-led, signs you can and should go product-led, when to hire your first head of growth and what to look for, a bunch of advice on hiring, something Merci is incredibly good at, and so much more. I hope that you enjoy this episode with Merci Grace.

(00:49):
So many product managers are basically treated like project managers. They get hired thinking they'll be deep in product strategy, vision, and getting to know their customers, only to wind up organizing other people's work and refining backlogs and organizing tiny, tiny features. If that sounds familiar, you need Dovetail, because Dovetail gets that the true heart of product management is understanding what customers want, why they want it, and how to give it to them. That's why Dovetail built a suite of user research products that help you get to the core of what your customers really want and why they want it. Dovetail offers powerful analysis tools to help you identify themes, patterns, and insights in your customer interviews, allowing you to make better data-informed decisions about what solutions you should build next. Organizations the world over, like Atlassian, Canva, Datadog, GitLab, Nielsen Norman Group, Sketch, Deloitte all use Dovetail to get a better understanding of their customers and build better products. Try Dovetail's products for free for as long as you need. You can sign up and dive straight in at dovetailapp.com/lenny.

(01:59):
This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel, offering powerful self-serve product analytics. Something we talk a lot about on the show is how startups can build successful and amazing products. And relying on gut feeling is a really expensive way to find out if you're heading in the right direction, especially when you're raising money, because VCs don't want to pay the price for these kinds of mistakes. That's why Mixpanel will give you $50,000 in credits when you join their startup program. With Mixpanel, startups find product market fit faster, helping you take your company from minimal viable product to the next unicorn. Access realtime insights with the help of their pre-built templates, and note that at every stage Mixpanel is helping you build with confidence and curiosity for free. Apply for the startup program today to claim your $50,000 in credits at mixpanel.com/startups with an S. And even if you're not a startup, Mixpanel has pricing plans for teams of every size. Grow your business like you've always imagined with Mixpanel.

(03:02):
Merci, thank you so much for joining me. I've always been such a fan of yours from afar through your writing and your Twitter. We've interacted a bit on Twitter. We've never really had a deep conversation. And so I'm really excited. And so, welcome.

Merci Grace (03:18):
Thank you. Excited to be here.

Lenny (03:20):
I'm excited to chat. You have this incredible background. You're a founder, you're a game designer, you're head of product, head of growth at Slack. Then you became a VC. Now you're a founder again. Such an impressive and unusual journey. I'm curious how you got into product initially, and then just how did you work your way up to head of product and the head of growth at Slack?

Merci Grace (03:42):
Yeah, I got into product accidentally. I was first a game designer and actually started a venture-backed game studio right after college when I had absolutely no idea what I was doing. I got my first term sheet as a founder before I knew what venture capital was. Purely accidental. And it's funny because my career arc went founder, game designer, product management, VC, CEO of your own startup, something that people try to do on purpose now, and I was not trying to do it on purpose at all. I was just following my curiosity and my love of how thinking works and how people make decisions. And so that really went from games, to product management, to venture, and then back into product.

Lenny (04:32):
Having been in VC now, having your own startup, what did you learn in that time that maybe surprised you now being a founder that, "Oh, wow. That was useful to learn and experience"?

Merci Grace (04:42):
Oh, yeah. So many things. I think one of the things that is quite obvious from the get-go, when you have had a few months under your belt, you've been seeing a bunch of pitches, and seeing the one-on-one pitches and then seeing the partner meeting pitches, is how different really great CEOs and startup leaders are at storytelling, at coming up with a pithy answer, at owning the room. The fundamentals of their businesses might not even look a lot better, but when you're in that room, you feel so differently about it. So I think how much really the founder matters.

(05:21):
And then the other thing, and this is my surprising thing about venture that I tell people that I didn't expect to learn, which is, especially on Twitter and even in the media and the press, some merger happens or doesn't happen, some deal happens or doesn't happen, and there's a lot of armchair quarterbacking where people are sort of filling in, "Oh, that happened because this fundamental shift in the market for X, Y, Z, because this research division and blah, blah, blah," a lot of things that seem really objective and really rational, but deals happen or don't happen typically because of interpersonal dynamics and sometimes even just personality clashes or petty holdouts from years before. And so I think how personal it is and how it's not always necessarily about the fundamentals of business. It's oftentimes because people just can see you as a founder, or CEO, or can see you running something like this. And so it's very subjective, more subjective than I thought it would be.

Lenny (06:32):
It's interesting. In both examples it comes back to the founder and how they present and how they behave. On the first point, presenting storytelling, being someone that VCs respect and want to invest in, is there anything that you have learned how to get better at that sort of thing, or is it just do it for a while and you'll get better? Is there something that folks can do to get stronger at that?

Merci Grace (06:54):
Yeah. When you have the opportunity to tell the story, when you have a pitch, when you're writing a blog post, when you're speaking at a conference, really, it's your stage. You get to manage the narrative and to say things in a certain way, position things in a certain way. And so that's where writing is really important. So even for a pitch or a conference talk or something like that, always start with an outline, always get really clear about, what's the arc of the story that you're telling?

(07:25):
And honestly, looking at things like movies and TV shows, every pitch should start in the middle of the action, like a thriller or like a drama, like Mission Impossible movies always start with Tom cruise doing some crazy shit in the middle of the job right before the job that the actual movie is about because it gets your attention. And so I think that's one of the things that people often try to fit whatever the template they think is. And often in business, it ends up being, "Oh, what's this more staid, boring way to say this?" And in truth, great storytellers are not boring and they don't seem businessy.

Lenny (08:09):
I love that very tactical piece of advice. Start with the action and the climax and work backwards from that, almost. Are there any examples of that that you recall of a founder doing that or a story that does that, just to make it even more concrete?

Merci Grace (08:21):
That is how great pitches always go. So oftentimes, and this is just every sort of mediocre pitch, mediocre pitch deck that you see will start with, "Oh, here's the market," or something like that, right? Which is like, this isn't a presentation about the market. This is a presentation about you. And so if you are going to say that you're the only founder that could start this company, or you have this really unique insight, start there. Even though it feels like you haven't built up to it yet, or anything like that, you don't have to, you'll backfill all of that later. But getting their attention so that they close the tab, they put down their phone, that's the most important thing. You can still lose them later in the narrative, but getting attention, just going to market and getting attention for a startup is the kind of P0 for any of those interactions.

Lenny (09:16):
I love that. So start with the insight. That's a really good piece of advice. I could see a lot of decks improve having done that. And I know a lot of VCs look for, "what is the unique insight this founder has?" And so that's a really good idea to start with that and blow people's minds a little bit.

Merci Grace (09:31):
Yeah.

Lenny (09:32):
Speaking of amazing founders, I want to segue a bit and to talk about Slack and your experience there with Stewart. What's something about Slack that maybe most people don't know?

Merci Grace (09:44):
Oh, yeah. It's funny, especially now, many years later, but Slack internally in 2015 kind of timeframe, it wasn't totally clear to people that the social aspect of Slack wasn't something that was important or meaningful to Slack internally. And so people would email us or talk to us at parties about, "Hey, have you seen Discord? They're coming for you." I'm like, "It's similar. It's not going after the same market." And people would actually join the company with some very concrete ideas or expectations about the social use case for Slack. And so, one of the best things, honestly, that the early founding team at Slack did and were able to give to those of us who followed them was the understanding that this is a tool for work. And that made thousands of small decisions instant and obvious.

(10:47):
There was this internal campaign that was very irritating to me at the time from people saying, "We absolutely need to allow people to block each other on Slack." All these people who are using open source communities, all these different sort of use cases for it. And I went on a bit of a rant, I would call it in... I think it was our culture channel, which was just its own sort of total shit show, but this channel where people would this meta thinking about Slack, and there was this consistent question about blocking. And so I went on quite a little tirade about how blocking is a tool. And so, yes, if someone is, you feel, harassing you and you would like to block them in the immediate moment, it will make you feel better. It'll make you feel a little more safe.

(11:41):
But businesses have an HR function and they should absolutely know. You're first of all sort of brushing it under the rug and letting this person go off and treat other people in this negative manner. And then the sort of counterpoint that I also provided is that blocking isn't always used by people to protect themselves. It could be used by people who don't like you at work to exclude you from important meetings or discussions. Your performance drops off. You eventually get put on a PIP or you have issues continuing to perform your job at work because people singled you out and multiple people blocked you and excluded you from the conversation. And I think that argument eventually made headway with people, but the fact that it was such an open conversation at the company really helped me see that it wasn't obvious to everyone that Slack was a work tool because it feels so social and it feels so fun.

Lenny (12:45):
I love that reversal and coming back to why this might hurt you versus why you may think you really need this feature. What this makes me think about is I actually use Slack for social feature in a big way. My newsletter subscribers, there's about seven, 8,000 people in a Slack.

Merci Grace (13:01):
Wow.

Lenny (13:02):
And it's the use case that you don't believe Slack should have done. I'm curious, and no hard feelings, do you feel like they will focus on this in the future? Or should they, maybe in the future? I'm guessing there's just not a lot of money to be made there. And so I could see why that's not a focus, but do you think that'll change?

Merci Grace (13:21):
Yeah, it's interesting. So you are participating in this creator economy that wasn't around at the same level in 2015. The kinds of communities that were happening on Slack would be a Burning Man community, an open source community that was massive and everyone had a weird Linux set up, and so it was usually time-consuming for our support team to help get people's machines working and things like that. So I don't know, because what you have is a little bit of a prosumer use case, right, where people have a personal but also very much a professional community with you as well. And I think that Discord is moving more in that direction. It's a little bit more of a natural step for them to take, I think. And it's funny, because for me, Slack doesn't exist anymore in the way that it did even a few years ago. It's not an independent company anymore. And so I think the question would be whether it aligns with the long-term interests of Salesforce.

Lenny (14:20):
Yep, that makes sense. We don't have to get into it too deep here, but I really like Slack for my use case because my subscribers are generally already in Slack. They're at work. Discord is just such a noisy thing and such a new product for people to use. People often love to hate on Slack because it's this big old thing and they're using it for work, but it's actually amazing for my use case, and so I'm going to keep using it. And Discord-

Merci Grace (14:44):
I know I still have the Women in Product community on Slack as well for that same reason and because it's professional and adjacent and it is tied into your professional identity as a person, but also, yeah, you're already on it. So reengaging your community is more a question of an app channel or a mention than it is having to reengage using an email campaign or something like that in order to get someone's attention.

Lenny (15:09):
Going in a slightly different direction and into growth, correct me if I'm wrong but Slack was one of the early innovators in this whole product-led growth movement. Is that accurate?

Merci Grace (15:21):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (15:22):
Okay, cool. So what I'm curious to hear is what was it like early on helping figure out how to grow this thing that became this behemoth massively successful company and figuring out this idea of product-led growth? And then I'll ask a couple questions as we chat through this.

Merci Grace (15:37):
Yeah. So early on, I mean, I definitely got the job that I got at Slack because I had been a game designer. And Stewart Butterfield, the CEO and founder, and I knew each other from our shared time having both run, it turned out, very unsuccessful gaming committees, and being people, I think, who have the same weird taste in indie games and things like that. And so he knew, and this was part of our discussion, that I would bring a familiar sensibility to the role I was hired to, which wasn't called growth at first, it was new user experience. So it was the onboarding experience, signing up, getting started. And that's really where we started with it, was coming at it from not trying to do a specific number or anything like that but a belief that this is a great product and we had product market fit, that was pretty obvious at the time, and so how do we help clear away the fog of war and let people see the map that is, "Here's Slack, and here's where everything is, and here's how you can get started using it"?

Lenny (16:50):
That is so interesting that so much of that was rooted in game design. I had no idea. That's so interesting that you both had that experience. It definitely shows in the experience. So at that point I imagine product growth was not a thing. It was just, "How do we grow this thing?"

Merci Grace (17:04):
Yeah.

Lenny (17:05):
What did you learn from that experience of just how to grow a thing like Slack that is user first and the way that a lot of companies are trying to grow these days?

Merci Grace (17:13):
Yeah. I think one of the best things that we did is that we really started with curiosity first, and we weren't like, "Okay, here are all of our baseline metrics. We already know what's important. Let's just do this." Because April Underwood, former CPO at Slack, had this great line that she would say internally, which is, "No one has built Slack before." I really loved that as this kind of mental starting place where it's like, there isn't going to be this cookie cutter thing. And it was funny too, in the experience of building out onboarding and running all these experiments at Slack, to see people copy things from the product that we knew were not working.

(17:59):
And so I think when I first joined early 2015, we had an onboarding experience that had these little circles that would animate. It was very light, too light. There were too many of them. I remember my first few weeks doing customer support in Zendesk, and I would get screenshots from people reporting some unrelated bug and notice this person has been a user for six months and I can see they still have these little throbbers all over the place. Okay, this is not working. People don't understand that they're supposed to click on them. I think Discord has a similar design, but they use the little World of Warcraft style exclamation point, which I'm sure is much more effective. But it was hilarious and also kind of sad to watch people trying to replicate things in our product that actually weren't even working for us, but they had no insight into that.

Lenny (18:52):
I had the same exact experience at Airbnb. People just sit there, copy everything Airbnb's doing and have no idea. There's so many failed experiments that haven't been unlaunched, and we're just trying to figure things out.

Merci Grace (19:04):
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. We're all trying to learn. I think it is very dangerous to say this specific metric is a North Star for every business. I think one of the most surprising things, and of course when something's true it becomes obvious and not at all surprising, but we had thought of Slack as a sync but also async kind of a platform, but then over the course of a bunch of experimentation and user research saw that a bunch of the things that moved the needle for us were about getting people into their new Slack team at the same time. So, Jules Walter, PM on the GRIF team, did some experiments around push notifications on mobile, just getting people in. It's still live in the product today because it was, it turns out, massively successful. It really matters that someone is there to greet you when you join.

Lenny (19:57):
Did you have a rule of thumb how many people needed to be in a Slack for it to start to take off?

Merci Grace (20:02):
We had a activation metric that we got to through some initial regression analysis, and then we tested the hypotheses that we developed from that regression analysis and made it into the product. And so for us it was three people, real human beings, not bots, and 50 messages, real messages, not people, because that was our real messages, not bot messages. Three people ended up being the lowest number at which things do start to break. So having a one-on-one conversation is a lot easier, having one-on-one text message or email, any other thing is going to be more straightforward. There's almost nothing, and especially when we were comparing ourselves so actively and successfully at the time to email, there is nothing broken about a 35 message one-on-one email conversation. It's totally fine. It's a series of letters back and forth. As soon as you add one more person to that, it gets a lot messier.

Lenny (21:08):
I forgot about that initial vision of Slack, trying to replace email.

Merci Grace (21:13):
I know.

Lenny (21:13):
That's not even something we talk about anymore. Interesting.

Merci Grace (21:14):
We never talk about it. Yeah. And now it's funny. I'll see some of the media that gets created or the television commercials and I'm like, "What is..." Balls moving around and little grooves and stuff. And I'm like, "I'm not sure what they're supposed to be comparing themselves to. Maybe just themselves."

Lenny (21:34):
Right. I think Slack is Slack now, and you don't need to replace email. I think they found a niche.

Merci Grace (21:40):
Yeah.

Lenny (21:40):
That also reminds me, I actually tried using Slack with my wife. It was just me and my wife in Slack. We tried to use that as our main communication hub, and it was a little much. We moved away.

Merci Grace (21:50):
Yeah, it is. It's funny how it's just a little too much architecture, a little, yeah, too big of a house for two people, kind of.

Lenny (21:59):
That's right. Yeah. But it was fun. We had channels for events and love. We had a love channel. Anyway.

Merci Grace (22:05):
No.

Lenny (22:07):
So you mentioned this push notification feature being really effective. Is there anything else that just stands out to you as, these are just lessons I've learned in how to grow a product that's kind of prosumer product-led bottom-uppy, things that stick with you that you bring to future products?

Merci Grace (22:22):
Oh, yeah. One of the big ones in that regard is the understanding that there are people who are just more social, right? I'm sure you're this kind of person. You're a connector and you know a lot of people, you love introducing them, bringing them together. We are who we are, fundamentally. And so within any population, including a user base, there will be people who are more likely to invite other people to the product or to bring people around into it, especially if it's something like a collaboration product. And so I thought it was much easier to get those people to share the product with bigger groups of folks than it would be to get someone who's just not like that, who never is the host, who doesn't invite people to stuff. It's a lot easier to get someone to send more invites than it is to get someone who's a little shy to even send one.

Lenny (23:16):
So what that makes me think about is just pick the right persona, an ICP. A person, especially for a social oriented product, will invite people into the product. Is that how you think about it?

Merci Grace (23:27):
Yeah, exactly. It's knowing the persona and then it's also doing things like making sure that someone has multiple opportunities to invite, even though it's a counterintuitive thing. Across many types of products I have seen user interviews where people are going through an onboarding experience, and they come to the invite screen and they say, "Oh, I would never invite someone. I haven't seen the inside of this product. I wouldn't do this," et cetera. That is advice to not listen to. You need to have invites early and often so that you catch people who want to share it, are social people. And then for the people who would never participate in that, they can ignore it or skip it. But that doesn't mean that it shouldn't be all over the entire product.

Lenny (24:17):
And it's optional at that point, right? It's just like, if you want to invite, invite, but you don't have to.

Merci Grace (24:23):
Yeah, yeah. I'm never a dark pattern person. I think it was Marco Polo, the async video chat app, did a bunch of dark pattern stuff, I remember, maybe three or four years ago where they would auto-select a ton of people and send them a text message that looked like it was from you. It was really awful. So I'm definitely not a dark pattern growth at any cost kind of a person, but it is like have the invites there for the people who will want to and the people who, even though they sound pretty offended in their tone of voice when they talk about, it's not enough for them to not engage with your product.

Lenny (25:00):
I find the same pattern effective with credit cards for a subscription app and B2C subscription. Just like, "This is a trial. You can enter your credit card now if you want, or you could do later." I find that drives a lot of growth in revenue because a lot of people are just like, "Yeah, I'm ready. Yeah. Let's just do it."

Merci Grace (25:15):
Yeah, exactly. I think people often, and this is probably even a larger statement about human beings, but we're so focused on ourselves, right? I think that's one thing that parents tell middle schoolers is, "I know you feel really awkward right now, but so does everyone else. No one's thinking about you. They're just thinking about themselves and how they come off." And then we'll do that to our own detriment in business where you'll set up something like a timed trial and say, "Okay. Well, I want to start getting revenue as soon as possible. So we'll just let people have this for a week." But the truth is for every week that you continue to let people use it, you get incrementally more people who do convert because their timing on buying your product has nothing to do with your schedule or how quickly you want revenue and everything to do with, where in the quarter is it for them? Do they have a new project that they can use to try out your product?

Lenny (26:12):
I love that advice. Just step out of yourself and recognize people have different motivations and are in different stages of the journey and may just be ready to go. And if you give them a chance it may actually work out really well. I wanted to chat a bit about onboarding. You mentioned that you initially started working on onboarding and that kind of turned into this growth team. I find onboarding often ends up being one of the biggest levers for retention, obviously for activation, and then just broadly growth. Is there anything that you've learned over time of just how to think about onboarding and how to optimize onboarding, how to approach onboarding as a growth team and maybe just as a startup?

Merci Grace (26:49):
Yeah. My thoughts and feelings about onboarding really go back to my experience designing games where I would design the game from the onboarding experience. So there wasn't a sense of, okay, here's exactly the game and all of the game dynamics. But how you introduce something, how you frame something matters a lot. How will someone discover this? And so if you can think about even an online product that you're working on from that first introduction, "What will it be like for someone to come in here? What will I be asking them to integrate with? Will I be asking them to upload something, to invite someone else? What are the steps between the user and the full value of your app?" is something that's very useful to think about literally from the first days that you're designing the product.

(27:46):
Unfortunately, many people think about onboarding at the last minute and it ends up being the final piece of product work, or, and this may be a little bit controversial of an opinion, but I'm not a fan of the plug and play frameworks for onboarding for that reason. I've seen them advertised actually using, "Here's how to replicate Slack's onboarding in using our tool," and things like that. And I'm like, "Oh God, don't do that because what worked for Slack won't necessarily work for you." And it certainly won't be native and feel deeply tied into the product experience, which it absolutely should be.

Lenny (28:29):
This episode is brought to you by Whimsical. When I ask product managers and designers on Twitter what software they use most, Whimsical is always one of the most mentioned products, and the users are fanatical. Whimsical is built for collaborative thinking, combining visual, text, and data canvases into one fluid medium. Distributed teams use Whimsical for workshops, whiteboarding, wire frames, user flows, and even feature specs, and that includes thousands of built-in icons and a rich library of templates. See why product teams at leading companies call Whimsical a game changer. Visit whimsical.com/lenny to have my own templates added to your account when you sign up. That's whimsical.com/lenny. For somebody that's trying to improve their onboarding and think about onboarding, are there examples of companies and flows that you think of that are really good, maybe other than Slack?

Merci Grace (29:25):
Yeah. The ones that I really find a lot of delight in tend to be ones that are deeply intertwined with the product. So throughout the course of using the product you learn you get onboarded to the value of it. Probably the clearest tools in which you can see this dynamic are things like to-do lists, where there will be an item on the to-do list that says, "Click the square next to this to mark this task as complete." And now you've just completed your first task and it's really in there, and it doesn't feel like this fake kind of veneer on top of it. I really like something that is not pasted on top of the experience but something that uses the product to teach someone else how to use the product.

Lenny (30:13):
You're telling me there's no easy plug and play silver bullet solutions? God damn it.

Merci Grace (30:18):
Yeah, I'm sorry. It turns out it's just hard work. The other thing that people don't do enough is stay in touch with the real human experience of what onboarding is for your product. So it's very easy, especially if you work at a company that has a high volume of signups every day, to just always look at the conversion number and that anonymized pile of people winding their way through your actually made up benchmarks for them. It is messier and way more awkward to have to talk to human beings, but absolutely necessary. You want to hear the tone of voice. You want to see the expression on their face. So once a month, ideally, you should just have some sort of a schedule for yourself where if you're at a larger company and you have a user researcher who can recruit people for you, that's great, but if not, just go find people who either fit the demographic for your user or even are your user and have them sign up for an account and walking through it. And it is embarrassing, but very educational.

Lenny (31:26):
That's awesome advice. It makes me think about Teresa Torres and her framework around continuous discovery habits, where she has this whole framework of setting up count leads, where people could just book you and you automatically talk to a customer every week. And we're going to have her on a different episode, maybe before this, maybe after this. I'm not sure how it's all going to play out. But yeah, that's a great reminder to invest in actually talking to customers. And that's a good segue. I wanted to come back to the whole idea of product-led growth, especially because it's so popular and hot and everyone wants to be product-led these days because it's cheaper and grows quickly and there are big sales teams. So first question is what have you found in looking at companies, talking to companies, advising companies, what are the most common mistakes would you say startups make when they think about figuring out product-led growth?

Merci Grace (32:13):
Oh, yeah. So one of the most common things that I see folks do when they haven't had much experience really simplifying onboarding down or something like that is they'll often have an idea of, "Okay, here are the seven things that you have to know about our product." And one of those is usually some power user feature that an executive really likes or something. They'll have this idea that they want to have a carousel that meets you when you open up the product and it takes you through all of these informational panes. And what's funny is that then if you were to talk to those same people in a usability study for some other product, they'd be like, "Oh, yeah. No. Click. I'm not going to read that."

(32:58):
But again, that's that sort of, we have this expectation of our users that they're going to give a shit, that they're going to read the text, that they're going to be at the level of investment in our product that we are, which is just categorically false. You have to understand that people have really limited attention and no one cares about your product the way that you do. And so it can feel like you're dumbing it down or oversimplifying. And if you don't feel that way about your onboarding, about the growth work that you're doing, it's probably too complex.

Lenny (33:34):
Do you find that if you have a carousel, something's gone wrong? Or are there times when a carousel and a little guide makes sense?

Merci Grace (33:41):
If the carousel is in a product where that's the modality of the product, so I could see a carousel, honestly, working for something like Tinder, where that's basically what the product is, right, you're swiping through it, sure, you can use a carousel for that, right? But only because it matches the user experience of the core product. But most apps that use carousels at the beginning, it is actually this pane that's built to be dismissed quickly.

Lenny (34:15):
Interesting. So what should people do when they're just like, "Oh, you're going to create this whole introduction carousel"? Is your advice simplified such that you don't really need that, broadly?

Merci Grace (34:26):
If you haven't been able to talk someone out of it, you can always show them. So I'm a huge fan of learning without shipping and building paper prototypes or building prototype in Figma, or ProtoPie, or something like that, and just do a bake off and prove the point, not with you saying, "Hey, CEO, you're wrong about X, Y, Z. We shouldn't have this three image carousel." Just come up with some different alternatives, like tool tips that are embedded in product, things that are obvious next steps that you can guide people to within a sort of constrained user experience, and then you'll just be able to actually compare whether people understood it, experience A, or whether more people understood experience B. And it can be shockingly clear.

Lenny (35:18):
Awesome. Yeah. I think in that you can probably tell people aren't going to want to sit through a carousel and check every step. They're just like, "Leave me alone. I'm going to figure it out."

Merci Grace (35:26):
Yeah. Or even ask someone, "Oh, what was the last carousel that you remember?"

Lenny (35:33):
"That you finished?"

Merci Grace (35:34):
Yeah. Just like, "What was the last one?"

Lenny (35:36):
Right.

Merci Grace (35:37):
"Oh, that's right. I always close them."

Lenny (35:40):
I love that. Coming back to product-led growth and figuring out how to do that well, what are signs that your product and just general business can be product-led versus like, "Okay, we're going to try it. It's probably not going to work out. We're probably going to have to hire salespeople quickly"?

Merci Grace (35:56):
Ideally, that's something that you've thought about pretty deeply before you even started to code the product, because whether you thought about it consciously or not, you have already decided whether it is going to be product-led or sales-led. If it is the type of a solution that you need buy-in from the head of HR to use because you need to integrate with systems that have a lot of PII in them and no IC has the keys to that system at any size of a company, boom, you know have a sales-led motion. That is what it is.

(36:32):
And so I think just having that sort of objective distance to your own product is always a fruitful kind of place to begin. If you have a product that even if it's for a specific function but anyone at any seniority level in that function could pick it up to use it, so DevTools are probably the most successful product-led growth companies that we don't talk about being product-led, but that's totally how they grow. A junior engineer or a really senior engineer can pick up some dev tool and play around with it and start using it, decide to take it into work or not.

(37:09):
So anything that you can pick up without needing to have the keys to Dad's Porsche in order to test out can be product-led. More and more I'm also seeing companies that have a enterprise sales motion to capture the customer at the point of adoption, but then they want to use product-led growth frameworks or tools to expand their usage to either drive up retention or to actually expand the number of seats and the number of departments that are using that tool. And that's actually a very good use for all of the same sort of frameworks and user experience concepts.

Lenny (37:53):
We're throwing out a lot of these terms, and I realize it might be helpful just to try to set a little context. I don't know if you have a clean definition of these things, but how do you define product-led versus bottom-up versus sales-driven, I think is pretty obvious, but how do you define these terms and think about them?

Merci Grace (38:10):
Yeah. For product-led, I think about it being something that anyone can get value out of your tool immediately and that the tool doesn't need to be augmented by a conversation, or a webinar, or anything like that with someone else in order for them to get to a certain threshold of value. Often you learn a lot as a business from doing a white-glove onboarding for certain personas, and they didn't need you to do that, but you wanted to do it. So, that's still really product-led.

(38:46):
And then it's funny, bottoms-up is often used in exactly the same way, but I would think of bottoms-up as being not just product-led but also something that can be adopted by anyone at any level within the organization. So there's tools for people managers, like a range, and a bunch of other ones, whereas a manager is running their one-on-ones, getting feedback from their team, et cetera, using this tool. That's a product-led tool often, but that's not really bottoms-up, because in order to grow that tool, you need to do a very good job of finding where managers are in businesses, targeting them, retargeting, and doing things to specifically reach out to someone in that particular function. Whereas, bottoms-up should be literally anyone at a 500 person company could start using this.

Lenny (39:40):
Got it. That's really helpful. I imagine the Venn diagram overlap of product-led and bottom-up is very overlapped. But in theory, you could have a sales-driven bottom-up strategy or a product-led top-down strategy. Is that right?

Merci Grace (39:57):
Yeah. Mm-hmm.

Lenny (39:58):
Very cool. Okay. So we've talked through the context and just definitions of these things, when a company can be product-led. It sounds like the main thing you look for is can an individual adopt this product at a company? That's like a sign that this can be product-led.

Merci Grace (39:58):
Yeah.

Lenny (40:14):
Is there anything else that you think is important that if these things don't exist, you should probably not try to be product-led?

Merci Grace (40:23):
Yeah. The other one that I don't hear people talk about very often is whether there's really day zero value in the tool. This is something that came up for me a lot when I was looking at a lot of these sort of video apps. So both the Presence app, where you're replicating a kind of office experience, or pre-pandemic, now I think this use case is a little more obvious, but pre-pandemic, getting on video chat with someone. And what it does is creates an automatic transcript of your meeting.

(40:55):
There isn't necessarily a lot of day zero value from doing one meeting on a tool like that, but often the pitch would be, "Hey, in six months or three months, you'll be glad that you recorded the transcripts for all of these interviews that you did because of X, Y, Z reason." That is not something that is valuable if they've been using it for months. It is not something that can be product-led because there's product-led in one direction, there's product-led back out in that same direction. And that can be the frustrating part about product-led growth is that the easier you make it to come in, also the easier it can be to leave.

Lenny (41:37):
Got it. So you're finding that it's really important for people that adopt it to stick around. And basically, finding value immediately is a way to increase retention and keep people around. And you're finding that if people don't stick around, it's not really going to work. And you need people there, salespeople, basically, keeping them on the product and using it.

Merci Grace (41:55):
Yeah.

Lenny (41:56):
Very cool. Eventually most companies end up hiring a salesperson. I was doing some research on this, and I found 100% of product-led growth companies hire a salesperson and a massive sales team eventually, like 100%. Do you have any thoughts, insights, experience on when it might make sense to bring in that first salesperson?

Merci Grace (42:13):
Yeah. So founders are always selling. So even from the time that you have your very first alpha customers. And it's funny, because I often reference actually the post that you did about how to find your first fast B2B customers.

Lenny (42:28):
How recursive.

Merci Grace (42:29):
Yeah, I know, and here we are again. It's all in that initial network, right? So the founder is always the first salesperson. So in that way it is often the case that one of the first three or four people who work in a company is actually a salesperson. But the point at which you should start to hire someone else to do that is when you, as the founder, absolutely cannot meet the demand even though you're getting up really early and staying up really late and building your investing deck on the weekend instead so you can continue to meet with customers.

(43:01):
And then the other time to do that, apart from just being maxed out, is when you are moving in to and usually up to a customer that both wants and expects to meet with a salesperson. That was what we went through at Slack, was moving from that engineer-driven SMB motion to then getting adopted at companies that really wanted to have a conversation with someone before they continue to spend a lot of money on their product. I think that's one of the things that maybe younger founders or people who haven't worked at enterprise companies before can discount is the customer preference. And then actually there's a whole set of customers that literally have to talk to someone before they can buy anything or just really want to.

Lenny (43:51):
I've never heard of it put that way where the customer is looking to talk to a salesperson and pull the sales team out of you. Interesting.

Merci Grace (43:58):
Yeah. And those are, of course, the salespeople's favorite person to talk to. It's like anyone, it's like you want to talk to someone who actually wants to talk to you.

Lenny (44:07):
I like that. So the advice is high-level. Wait until you just can't do sales as a founder and/or wait for the fact that the companies you're selling to are just expecting a salesperson or a sales team to support them.

Merci Grace (44:21):
Yeah.

Lenny (44:21):
Awesome. So that reminds me of another topic I wanted to make sure we chatted about, which is hiring. We were tweeting a bit about this, about the team that you built at Slack and how epic that alumni class is. We're going to have Fareed on here, who worked for you for a while. And so I wanted to get your insights on just, what do you look for when you're hiring people? How do you find/select/keep amazing talents on a team when you're building a company like Slack?

Merci Grace (44:46):
Yeah, I think a lot of it is the approach is not an exam that I'm proctoring, right, when I'm hiring a role. I'm not sitting in an ivory tower in the seat of judgment. What I'm trying to do is to make sure that whoever I offer the role to wants to take it and will thrive at the company, that they're the right kind of person for the role, especially in product where someone who's a super successful PM at Lyst is not necessarily going to be a super successful PM at Slack, or at Airbnb, or at Pinterest, even though if you think about that class or that cohort of companies, we would've all applied to each other's companies. In fact, I think I actually got rejected by Airbnb on three different occasions throughout the course of-

Lenny (45:40):
Oh, boy.

Merci Grace (45:40):
... different years. Because I love travel and it's a great company. But I think there was just something about, I probably would not have been successful in the same way I was at Slack if I had had one of those roles. So I think understanding that it is a two-way street, and when a hiring manager has that vibe, they're going to end up, I think, hiring people who are just positioned to thrive at that company, because you're not saying, "Oh, here's someone that I can get and I can pop them into this power structure that means something to me." It's finding someone like Fareed and saying, "Okay, I could see you having a long and really successful career at this company because of your curiosity, because you're a great communicator, because anyone who's ever worked with you would immediately work with you again." And those are things that I think if you're like, "Let's do this whiteboarding exercise and I'm going to talk down to you," you never end up finding out about someone.

Lenny (46:38):
Got it. So a lot of it is particular to the company, understanding the culture, how they work and finding that fit for person, like person, company, product market fit.

Merci Grace (46:46):
Yeah.

Lenny (46:47):
Are there any universal things that you look for that maybe other people may not look for, things that you've learned of just like, "Oh, I'm going to make sure these habits/traits/behaviors exist?"

Merci Grace (46:58):
Yeah. I always ask people to do, for an ICPM... World's different if you're hiring a director or a VP. For a standard PM role, I always make people do work. I think we've gone back and forth on Twitter about this. And it's funny, it's definitely something that it's just in the last, I don't know, five or six years, I feel like people are really pushing back on doing what they I think unfairly characterize as free work for a company. I treated this out, but I mean, if you don't want to even do three hours of free work for a company, you probably don't want to work at that company. It's this weird, if you need to be paid for every second of effort that you're putting in, I mean, you probably shouldn't be near a startup in that case because, I hate to break it to you, but the startup that you're at might not be successful and then you will have done all of this work for "nothing."

(47:57):
And so I really use that as a way to see into how someone thinks, the quality of the solutions that they bring, how they communicate. There's just so much bundled up in giving someone an actual problem, ideally to pick, not one that's assigned to them, but, "Here's three different problems." Because you learn a lot about someone from every choice that they make. I think that's probably my most controversial hiring topic, but I've found a very direct relationship between the people who just really kicked ass on this, went on to be very successful and lead organizations at Slack.

Lenny (48:32):
And you're specifically referring to the project that they do, right, on their own time?

Merci Grace (48:35):
Yeah.

Lenny (48:36):
What did you look for in their results of their project?

Merci Grace (48:40):
The quality of the solution. Something like Slack is not a deeply technical product, but I was a little bit surprised to see a number of smart people who'd worked at good companies who decided that, "Okay, it's magic wand time." And now assuming that, for instance, Slack bot was a state machine that had a bunch of contacts and would have this almost NLP-driven conversation with you. So that was a big red flag to me, for someone just not... And it's funny because I'm not like an engineer and I wouldn't even think of myself as a "technical PM." But PMs have to know basics of how the tools work and what would work in the tool. So, that's a big one.

(49:34):
Whether someone was able to tell a compelling story was huge, especially at Slack, which was a very product-driven company, a very narrative-driven company. If you were going to present data, it needed to be within a very specific context. And it wasn't a company where the number always won. It was a company where the story always won. And so if someone did a great job of structuring a narrative, they had technically possible but also creative solutions and they picked one for good reasons, they would know how to measure it and how to build something like that, they were just going to be much better than someone who didn't hit literally every single one of those things at a high-level.

Lenny (50:21):
I like your point about Slack being story-driven and how people with a great story often win. Is that a part of the Slack culture and how Slack works?

Merci Grace (50:31):
I think it's still probably that way. It was a huge part of the culture when I was there, when it was the initial founding team and an independent company as well. So who knows what will be successful for them within Salesforce? I think it's quite literally a different company now.

Lenny (50:49):
Whoever has the best CRM wins. That's really the point.

Merci Grace (50:54):
Yeah, exactly. The good leads.

Lenny (50:55):
Yeah. So we've been talking about hiring, and I want to come back to the growth element. So you built the growth team at Slack. How did you think about building out a growth team? And I'm also curious, just when should a company bring in a first head of growth?

Merci Grace (51:13):
Yeah, yeah. It is time to start working on growth when you feel like you have product market fit. It doesn't have to be totally perfect because you absolutely use a growth team to really accelerate and improve your product market fit. That is a part of the value of the growth team. But you do need to feel like, "Okay, once we..." Even if it's do a white-glove onboarding with people, if I spend 20 minutes with you and I show you my tool and I explain how it works, wow, you really get it. You want to pay me money for it. You're still using it six months later, you're ready for a GRIF team. You don't have to have all of your ducks in a row. You don't have to have everything instrumented.

(51:59):
And then what I often tell people is that, "Your first PM to touch growth or just engineer or PMM to work on, it should be someone who has a lot of trust at the company and who really loves and understands your customer." Because a lot of the growth stuff is pretty straightforward. It's a funnel, right? There's a lot of fantastic classes like Reforge. There's a lot of writing on the internet about how to do it. But to a certain extent, everyone is inventing the specific things that work really well for their customer and their product.

Lenny (52:35):
So you co-founded Women in Product, which is an organization as an outsider I've been incredibly impressed with, and I'm trying as often as possible to collaborate with the community. There's all these local chapters, and everyone I've ever met that's in the community has been incredible. And so I'm curious as a product leader, as a founder looking to bring in more women and have a more diverse product management org, or just org in general, what are one to two things that folks can do? The obvious answer, I imagine, is hire more women. Is there other advice you could share with folks that are trying to have a more diverse company and product team?

Merci Grace (53:08):
Yeah, it's funny, I don't think it's always hiring more women because not all women are friends to other women, and they may in fact relish their position as the only girl. I think on Reddit it's like the, "I'm not like the other girl's name," or whatever. You could easily get someone in like that and she can actually actively turn off other women.

Lenny (53:31):
Oh, wow.

Merci Grace (53:31):
One of the interesting things that I've seen about hiring women is that women do tend to be less aggressive and risk seeking than men do. I really didn't want that to be true, and I think I'm an outlier in being a multiple time founder and things like that. I have a risk profile that I have been bummed to see is not something that's widely shared by other women. And so I think part of it is that you, if you're just looking at passive inbound or through referrals or things like that, you're just going to end up with fewer women in your pipeline and you are going to close women, I think, at a lower conversion rate than you close men, especially if you're an earlier or riskier business.

(54:21):
And so in order to offset that, you just need to go interview a lot of women and not blame it on the pipeline. You need to actually go seek them out and find them. And then once you do, it can be this really self-reinforcing mechanism. The way that a lot of diversity initiatives that companies work is that it's one thing to have a team of all white men, but if you have two African American people in your first 20 people, you could have a lot more diversity and not even amongst just that one group. Women want to work with other women, but men of all races I think look at an organization, but let's say it's all white people, but there's a few women, they may look at it as just a more diverse, more friendly place and be less intimidated to be, for instance, the first person of color who works there.

Lenny (55:16):
That makes me think about Slack. Early on, it was one of the most diverse teams that I'd seen. Is that relatively accurate?

Merci Grace (55:22):
Yeah. We spent a lot of time on that pipeline, making sure that there were a lot of people who got interviewed. And it was never like an excuse as to not find someone. Then that kind of inertia that can make you end up with a company of 50 white men because they referred their friends, the people who they naturally feel comfortable with and things like that, that can also work in your favor if early on you just hire more women and you hire more people of color. They'll feel more comfortable because they're not the only one, and then they'll refer their friends as well.

Lenny (56:01):
So especially important when you're just starting out to put a lot of time into this. It sounds like that's the core of this is prioritize it, put in the time, especially early on, because that'll create this flywheel.

Merci Grace (56:12):
Yeah. It's funny, I've often been the only woman on a team at a startup or literally at the startup entirely. And there is a huge difference, I've found, between being the only woman and being one of even two women. The tone really changes. People then are like, "Oh, now we have women coworkers." It's not just Merci who also plays D&D and curses at the office or whatever. It is women as this more general class. And so they start to honestly be more respectful and kinder to each other and treat each other better too. And so I think that's like the other thing. It's not like it's better for anyone to be in a homogenous group. I think it's actually better for everyone to be in a more diverse group because the sort of baseline for how you treat each other goes up.

Lenny (57:07):
Speaking of founders and startups, you're working on something now. For people maybe interested in working with you or maybe even potential customers, is there anything that you want to share about what you're working on, where it's going, anything there?

Merci Grace (57:20):
Yeah. So we're really early, and I'm not exactly sure when this podcast is coming out, but if you go to panobi.com, it's P-A-N-O-B-I .com, there is either a real landing page there, or today there is just a Google form for you to fill out that will ask you a few questions about product-led growth, which is the area that we're building in. And if you're someone who is curious about product-led growth, if you're head of growth at a company, if you're a CEO, or a founder, or an investor who's interested in finding out more, picking up maybe even a tool to help you be successful at it, go to panobi.com, and you can also just DM me on Twitter.

Lenny (58:02):
Speaking of that, where can folks find you online? How do they reach out? And then also just how can the audience be useful to you?

Merci Grace (58:11):
Oh, that's nice. So you can find me online. On Twitter, I think, is probably my best sort of public inbox. My DMs are open. I do respond to them, especially if it's something direct that I can be helpful with. If you are a woman in product management, go to womeninproduct.com and you can apply to join our community. We've been going since 2015, and there's many people who are in it as well. And then, yeah, if you're interested in growth more generally go to panobi.com.

Lenny (58:40):
Amazing. Merci, thank you so much for joining me. I had a ton of fun. I learned a ton, and thank you.

Merci Grace (58:46):
Likewise, Lenny. Thank you.

Lenny (58:50):
That was awesome. Thank you for listening. If you enjoyed the chat, don't forget to subscribe to the podcast. You can also learn more at lennyspodcast.com. I'll see you in the next episode.

Nilan Peiris (00:00:00):
Some people focus on conversion rate, like, "I'm going to make this really, really slick." And that's cool. You get a bit more growth. But to get to recommendation, you're going to blow your user socks off. You have to give them an experience they didn't know was previously possible. And when you are in that place of doing something that no one has ever done before, that's when you get it.

Lenny (00:00:23):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Nilan Peiris. Nilan is chief product Officer at Wise, where he has been for over 11 years, basically from the beginning of the journey. If you're not familiar with Wise, you should be. They make it incredibly easy and cheap to send money internationally. I am a regular user and customer, and because the product is so great, they've grown primarily through word of mouth. About 70% of their growth comes through word of mouth. And in our conversation, Nilan breaks down exactly how they made word of mouth so successful for their product. I don't know any founder who wouldn't wish to have more word of mouth growth, and Nilan's advice is the most tactical, and useful advice I've ever heard for how to actually drive your word of mouth growth. I am really excited for you to hear this episode, and to learn from Nilan. And so with that, I bring you Nilan Peiris, after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:20):
This episode is brought to you by Pendo, the all-in-one platform for product-led companies building breakthrough digital experiences. With all the tools you need, all in one simple to use platform, Pendo makes it easy to answer critical questions about how users are engaging with your product, and then turn those insights into action. With product analytics, low-code in-app guides, user feedback and session replay, customizable roadmaps, and AI generated insights and campaigns, Pendo is the only solution you need to build, ship and optimize a successful product-led motion. But don't take my word for it. Create your free Pendo account today and start building better experiences across every corner of your product. P.S., want to take your product-led know-how a step further? Check out Pendo's lineup of certification courses led by top PLG experts, and design to help you grow and advance in your career. Learn more and experience the power of the Pendo platform today at pendo.io/lenny. That's pendo.io/lenny.

(00:02:22):
This episode is brought to you by Wix Studio. Your agency has just landed a dream client. You already have big ideas for the website, but do you have the tools to bring your ambitious vision to life? Let me tell you about Wix Studio, the new platform that lets agencies deliver exceptional client sites with maximum efficiency. How? First, let's talk about advanced design capabilities. With Wix Studio, you can build unique layouts with a revolutionary grid experience, and watches elements scale proportionally by default.

(00:02:50):
No-code animations add Sparks of delight while adding custom CSS gives total design control, bringing ambitious client projects to life in any industry with a fully integrated suite of business solutions. From e-commerce to events, bookings and more, and extend the capabilities even further with hundreds of APIs and integrations. You know what else? The workflows just make sense. There's the built-in AI tools, the on canvas collaborating, a centralized workspace, the reuse of assets across sites, the seamless client handover, and that's not all. Find out more at wix.com/studio. Nilan, thank you so much for being here. Welcome to the podcast.

Nilan Peiris (00:03:32):
Thanks for having me, Lenny.

Lenny (00:03:33):
So you're chief product officer at Wise, which I don't know if you knew this, but I'm a very happy weekly active user of. To give folks a little bit of context on Wise, could you just explain, what does Wise do? And also share maybe a few stats to give people a sense of the scale that Wise has reached at this point.

Nilan Peiris (00:03:51):
We're looking to solve the problems associated with cross-border money movement, which is that moving money across border is pretty slow. It's actually really expensive, and it can be really hard to do. We solve it with three products, our money transfer product, which is what we started with, our account, which would be like, think of trying to solve the problems of international banking with our account for people, and for businesses. And then finally we've also got an enterprise product where we take the underlying infrastructure that's powered those products that we've built, and embed them in the banks, and products that people use every day, and then zooming into the numbers. So, we've got to come a little way on the journey. So today we're now moving about $12 billion a month, growing between 30 to 40% year on year. We take about 0.65% on average across all our routes as price, and we've been profitable for about more than four years now, with 20% EBITDA margins.

(00:05:05):
But probably the stat I'm most proud of, and the hardest thing to make happen out of all of that was we acquired 70% of the users that found out about Wise last month through word of mouth. So, contextually, we have 16 million customers, and we're acquiring about a million a quarter, about 10 million actives, and yes, so out of a million that joined Wise the first time, 700,000 found out about Wise from a friend.

Lenny (00:05:36):
There's a couple stats there that really stand out to me. One is you're gaining a million new users a quarter, which is insane. Just like a million new people joining Wise every quarter. That's an astounding number. The other number is what you just shared around word of mouth, that basically more than two thirds of people are discovering Wise and joining Wise through word of mouth. Mouth. I want to spend the bulk of our conversation on this topic of word of mouth. I think it's extremely rare how you've been able to increase word of mouth, and just how much of your growth comes through word of mouth.

(00:06:08):
You've essentially developed a system for how to drive word of mouth, and how to basically structure your team, your goals, your priorities and things like that in order to lean into this growth channel. And so, I just have a million questions around how you think about word of mouth, and the first is just, how do you measure word of mouth? How do you know that say, 70% of your growth is coming through word of mouth?

Nilan Peiris (00:06:28):
We ask customers, is the short answer. So, we have an attribution model, as you can imagine, and we've had one from the early days, and it overlays all the referrer data and cookie data you have on visits comes to the website. So you kind of know that. And then you obviously have the soundtrack stuff, and we sample, and ask customers a set of questions on this, and then overlay that onto the... What turns up in your web tracking as direct traffic to give us a sense of how big that word of mouth number is, and that's what gets us back to the 70% stat.

Lenny (00:07:05):
And very practically, how do you actually ask people? Is there a little pop-up on the website?

Nilan Peiris (00:07:09):
It's actually integrated into the flow. So when we built it originally, we thought it's quite cool, marketing and acquiring customers is part of the product, and we should actually stitch that into the experience seamlessly so that we're able to do this more effectively going forward.

Lenny (00:07:26):
That's actually, at Airbnb, exactly how the team did that, to understand what percentage of growth was word of mouth. It's just a little interstitial popup when you visit say, airbnb.com, "How'd you hear about us?" You think there's some fancy ways to understand the stuff, but it's just like, just ask people, they'll tell you how they heard about it.

Nilan Peiris (00:07:40):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:07:41):
Awesome. Okay, so just to kind of dig into the meat of it, what has been the biggest shift in helping you significantly grow word of mouth, and make it such a huge lever of growth for Wise?

Nilan Peiris (00:07:53):
Yeah, before I launch into this, let's just also take a step back, and why even focus on this? So in the early days, when I met the founders, Kristo and Tyler. It was quite funny, I got introed to them when they were just the founders, and without a team really, and with the beginnings of a product, and they said, "Nilan, you've got to meet these guys, they've got a great product, they just don't have any customers." And I sat there with them, and we kind of launched the first Google ads, and in the early days you try everything, hoping that something works. But taking a step back, think of money as the ultimate commodity. It's pretty hard to build an expensive business that moves your money somewhere, and it costs a lot, so there's less of it afterwards.

(00:08:48):
So building a brand led money transfer business, the brand's got to be pretty damn good, right? You're going to feel pretty special afterwards, in order to have less money afterwards. So what we're looking for always, but what channels out there are super scalable, and can reach our entire audience, but have an incredibly low distribution cost. So, that's one thing that led us to word of mouth and the other bit, when we get on to talk about marketing later, the other challenge with marketing which is unique is because we are lower price, but a superior product, we have less margin to spend on marketing than others in certain paid channels. So that's another reason why marketing is inherently hard. Our marketing team does amazing work at Wise, in order to work within those constraints.

(00:09:36):
But back to your question, which was like, what's the biggest thing we've done to shift word of mouth. When I joined Wise, and started wrangling with word of mouth, I spent a bunch of time with friends of mine in the US and around the world, Andrew Chen, some of the other growth gurus, this is going back 10, 12 years. It's like what mouths, who's done it? What's the system? What do you measure? There wasn't really anything out there. So we kind of had to figure our way out. So, first step was asking it, and the second step was kind of figure out how do you know what's driving it? And the best proxy we found for this was something that most people have heard of, that we actually used quite a lot is net promoter score.

(00:10:26):
So from the very early days we'd start asking customers, and you probably have seen this survey, "Would you recommend Wise to a friend?"

Lenny (00:10:34):
Never seen that ever in my life. Never been asked that question.

Nilan Peiris (00:10:39):
Exactly. There's [inaudible 00:10:41] you said. And then in the end you've got the scale, zero to 10, and the theory is nine to 10 there are promoters, and zero to seven are detractors. Zero to six, detractors, and seven to eight are kind of neutral on your product. The intriguing bet was when we overlaid this... So we have word of mouth, it's about 50 odd percent, and then we have a referral program. When we overlay the referral data over the NPS survey data, we saw something really interesting.

(00:11:13):
There's very low invite rates at one to six, and not just invite, conversion rates of users that joined for invites. But when we've got people from sixes to this seven and eight group, they doubled the number of people they told. Eight to nine, they doubled again, and nine to 10, they doubled again. So, this is pretty crazy when you see it for the first time. I'm going to get back to your question in a sec, but it's quite core buildup to it, because when you are a product manager, like you've been in your career, one of your jobs is to figure out what metric are you going to optimize for? What are you going to try to get the business to ground behind? And if you optimize for something like conversion, rate and you move conversion rate with 10%, you kind of get this one-off hit.

(00:12:00):
But if you move the NPS from 30% to 50%, you increase the viral coefficient of your customer base. So every customer that goes through tells X many more. When you model this through, the ROI on NPS increases is absolutely huge. So, it's got to say, "Okay, this is the thing to zoom in on, so how to move it?" So, then the second magic of NPS is you get the numbers, but you also get the comments underneath it. I remember in the first year we built the NPS survey, and we emailed out every week all the comments to the whole company, which was pretty small, and we kept doing that, I think up till about three or four years, everyone got the NPS comments.

(00:12:51):
And when you read the comments, and now obviously we've got all kinds of fancy models sitting on top of these things, customers kept telling us the same things, "Make it faster, make it cheaper, make it easier to use." Do you know at the beginning, when I said, "Price, speed, ease of use," we kind of figured this out by thinking hard about this question. How do we make this product so good that people will use, it but they'll recommend it?

(00:13:20):
And customers were pretty clear, the ones that were evangelical, is the word we use, are the ones that had a much... Had this cheaper experience, the ones that were talking about it had a fast experience. So it's about price, about speed, it's about ease of use. And when you generalize and take a step back, and look at consumer product companies, they have these product pillars they call it, and they usually have KPIs around them. The second insight we got, found, is when we entered markets, like when we entered the US for the first time, if we entered with a product that was priced at say 5.9%, and the alternative was six, customers would use us, but they wouldn't talk about us. We only got the advocacy when we were eight to 10 times cheaper. That's when people started talking about it.

Lenny (00:14:11):
Let me actually interrupt you here a bit, just to kind of set a little frame around this, because this is extremely interesting, and I think people may miss, I think, some of the really interesting insights here. What I'm hearing is essentially there's this clear sense that you had to grow through word of mouth because of the business model. You didn't make a lot of money per user, and you didn't have a lot of money to spend thus, to help grow. So essentially it's like. "How do we grow the word of mouth?" And then it's, "Okay, what do we need to convince people to share this product?" And used NPS, which I think a lot of people use, and also a lot of people probably know, "Let's make our product more awesome so that people talk about it." Those are kind of like, "Oh yeah, of course."

(00:14:49):
But I think what I'm hearing is that you did that's really unique, is one, you found this huge delta between these detractors, and even seven or... I guess it was six and below, and then seven or eight, and then nine, 10 kept kind of doubling. So one is just this focus on, how do we get someone from there to there? Two is this really big focus on the comments of the NPS survey, not just like, "Oh we have this percentage of detractors." And then also I love how you just create these pillars, essentially, of like, "We're going to work on these three things. These are the three levers to help grow word of mouth for this product." Does that sound about right?

Nilan Peiris (00:15:25):
That all makes sense. Obviously at the time, it is also way more chaotic.

Lenny (00:15:33):
Yeah.

Nilan Peiris (00:15:33):
So, at the beginning, everyone thinks it's 20 different things, and then over time, slowly, you understand that it's these things again and again. And a lot of building a successful businesses kind of building conviction that these are the things that matter. So, now I'd say price, speed, ease of use, it sounds... Like, but yeah, go back to seven, eight years. But we were arguing with each other around what, "Is it trust? Is it this? Is it this?" Trying to get clear on what are the things we missed there.

Lenny (00:16:00):
That would be useful actually to know. It sounds like, of course, it's going to be price and speed, but what are the things you kind of realize you don't need to focus on as much, based on these surveys?

Nilan Peiris (00:16:09):
Oh, wow, that's a really hard one. So, then the challenge, is as you know, everything is important.

Lenny (00:16:17):
Yeah.

Nilan Peiris (00:16:17):
Yeah? And that things that we use... We have a bucket called convenience. And inside the convenience bucket, there are many, many things hiding in there. And actually, you can measure this on contact rate, conversion rate, whatever, many different ways, and get many slightly different answers. So, I think I've learned there isn't... I haven't got a good answer on things we haven't-

Lenny (00:16:42):
Well, as you said, trust, which is interesting. Obviously trust matters, but maybe it sounds like-

Nilan Peiris (00:16:47):
Trust certainly matters. Yeah, trust's a good one. Let's talk about that one bit. I'll talk to you through the trust problem. So I ran into the trust problem hardest in marketing. So, just imagine, you just started out, you've got a money transfer company, it's good, your product's really good, it's really cheap. So, you put an ad out, and it says, "Move money with Wise, and really cheaply," is anyone going to click that? People did, right? Is anyone going to use it? Yeah, people did use it. And you did work all the usual trust elements. But the bit I found that really helped, the way I got my head around this, was what people trust is their friends. And this really was way stronger a trust signal than anything I could put on a landing page.

(00:17:40):
And even when people came in through marketing, they'd been told. So marketing can aid recall, and all kinds of things, because people are told by their friends. They'd have a use case later on, then Google, and like, "Ah, I remember, this guy used this." And we do definitely get users, especially today as we've got a larger brand, through marketing direct. But trust in isolation is a really hard problem to solve. You need to get under the skin of what it means. People don't think my money is safe. "I don't know if this company is reputable," to unpick each of these problems and figure out systemically how to solve them. And we've done this to some extent, but really there's a massive shortcut, which is if you deliver your customers a good experience, then figure out, how do you make it so good they'll recommend it? Then that kind of shortcut a lot of really hard trust problems.

Lenny (00:18:28):
What did you find most helped increase trust in that way? Is it just get more people using it and then they'll share with their friends, or is there something you did there to...

Nilan Peiris (00:18:36):
No, it was literally get more people using it, and they'll share with their friends. There's obviously a bunch of learnings we've had around what specific trust sentiments matter, especially geographically, but less powerful in the macro than get more people to use it.

(00:18:52):
So coming back to that, and I'd love to get your thoughts on this one. So, as you said, lots of people go up to NPS, and they kind of heard people talk about it, heard people talk about recommendations. So my learning on this is you've got to work really hard to get recommendation. So, to get a nine or a 10, so our NPS is 70%, so it's really, really high. So it's kind of higher than the iPhone, and Google search. So really, really high, so off the scale high.

(00:19:25):
And when we launch a market, or at the beginning it was much lower, so 20s and 30s. So instead it in context, like banks and financial services NPS is -30. So, most people don't recommend banks. So it's like, comes from a low base. But, what I've found is when you build a product, most founders, and most teams kind of stop when it works. As their next step, some people focus on conversion rate like, "I'm going to make this really, really slick," and that's cool, you get a bit more growth.

(00:20:02):
But to get to recommendation, you're going to blow your users' socks off, and the phrase we use is, you have to give them an experience they didn't know was previously possible. And when you are in that place of doing something that no one has ever done before, that's where you get it.

(00:20:24):
So the bar is all the way up there. And to put that in context, that means figuring out how to move money instantly. That means figuring out how to drop the price all the way from six all the way down to 0.35. And that's because there are systemic infrastructure issues in moving money around the world, which some people haven't solved before. And these problems are just really hard to solve. They take years to solve, but they have huge kind of returns when you do it.

Lenny (00:20:52):
I love that just as a framework, is how do... We need to blow our users' socks off. And again, it just comes back to how you can get people to want to share this product, and drive word of mouth, blow their socks off.

(00:21:02):
I want to dig into how you actually just figured out what these attributes are. Obviously you talked about this NPS survey highlighting things. How did you decide it was instant money movement, and some of the other things? Is it just basically looking at these survey results, and picking the things that come up most often?

Nilan Peiris (00:21:20):
Yeah, it was talking to customers, and looking at the survey results, and then through that, in many different ways, price will come up, speed will come up, ease of use will come up, and they kind of aggregate up to that.

Lenny (00:21:31):
I think a lot of people listening are still going to be this like, "Okay, we're just going to make our product awesome, and it's going to grow." And in a sense, yeah, in another sense what you're sharing is essentially kind of a really simple framework for how to actually do that. To kind of go a little deeper there, when you see other people trying to drive word of mouth, trying to drive virality, is there anything you think people often do wrong? Is there other missteps you've taken in trying to drive word of mouth?

Nilan Peiris (00:21:59):
It's this thing around growth rate. So, especially product net growth, which is what we're talking about. So you can imagine, we're going to open a new market to Indonesia, and the fastest way to do it is to take... Someone else has figured out how to move to Indonesia. We take that infrastructure, and we'll plug it into Wise,

(00:22:18):
You know what? We can do this, we'll get some users. But it doesn't grow like a hockey stick. It doesn't grow like a hockey stick because we haven't fundamentally changed the problems in moving money internationally. So, got this mantra, you've got to build a 10x better product than what's there. And if it's 10x product better, basically it doesn't exist already. So if you're plugging in something else, that's kind of a misstep.

(00:22:45):
So it comes from a very logical place, how do I get users quickly? I can take a shortcut in doing this, but that, you kind of realize is wasted effort. So the step then becomes this much harder question of these types of questions. Like what is the theoretical minimum cost for moving money into a market? What is the theoretical maximum speed? Not just make it instant, make it cheap, but what actually is the lowest it could possibly be? And instead of incrementally going, doing a jump to make it a little better, a little better, a little better, you can never get there. How do we take two years, and end up there?

Lenny (00:23:24):
I love that. It's something that I talk about a lot. Something I learned at Airbnb is this idea of working backwards from the ideal, instead of working forwards from how do we iterate and make this better, and better, and better. It's like, okay, if we could start again, and we could create the ideal experience, what would that look like? And then work backwards from what would it take to get there?

Nilan Peiris (00:23:44):
And what's an example of that at Airbnb? What was an ideal that you guys went for and then built?

Lenny (00:23:49):
The ideal was, there's this whole process where the founders hired this storyboard artist from Pixar to draw out the ideal experience of a host and a guest. So, there's these storyboards sitting in the office. I think there's 12 kind of... They call them key frames of, it's just like the booking experience being really seamless, arriving in the home, and being really amazed. Going out and finding things to do.

(00:24:13):
So, this became essentially the vision of the company is let's make each of these frames, these key moments of a journey for hosting a guest as incredible as possible. That was one, and that became essentially the strategy for a few years is just make each of these frames awesome.

(00:24:29):
And then there was another project that they were working on around booking at Airbnb. I don't know if you remember this, if you used Airbnb much, but most of Airbnb back in the day was you request to book with a host, you're like, "Hey, can I stay in your home?"

Nilan Peiris (00:24:41):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:24:42):
And turned out 50% of the time the guest was ignored, or rejected, and the host was just like, "Nah, no thank you." Now, over 80% as far as I know of bookings are instant bookings, where you just book and it's done, just like every other place you book online. And so that was a huge transition that I worked on, and that came from, if we were to start Airbnb again today, or if someone were to disrupt Airbnb, what would it look like? And obviously it'd be you just book. You're not sitting around hoping someone is cool with you. So, that came from that idea of just like, what would be the ideal Airbnb experience?

Nilan Peiris (00:25:15):
That is incredibly inspiring. I'll try and share a couple of stories, analogies from Wise. I'll talk about two things. Let's talk about price first. So, it's a good question. So, Moneytrans has been around since the [inaudible 00:25:32]. How does a few people get together? And it's evolved towards moving trillions around the world, and generally retail consumers paying about six to 7% around the world to do it. How do a small team in Europe start out and figure out how to move it? We launched at 0.5%, and now we're down to about 0.35%. So what changed?

Lenny (00:25:57):
Yeah, I was going to ask, how did you do that? That sounds like everyone would want to do that.

Nilan Peiris (00:26:02):
Yeah, so let's try to unpick it a little bit. So, first question you'd ask is, "I know what you're doing, you're losing money on every transfer." It's like, "Especially what you're doing," but we've been profitable for five years. And one of the magical things here was we're actually profitable in every transaction. So it's probably about four or five years ago, I led this project to start to pull together our pricing.

(00:26:30):
So, every month you get bills, and they turn up in your P&L, but every single bill we got, we allocated the cost back to the customer, or the transaction that generated it. And then we add our margin on top, and that's our price. And when you look at this and you analyze it, you'll find obviously there are 20% of customers generating 80% of the costs. And what you do is you get those 20%, you give them a raise, because they should cover their costs, and you drop the price to everyone else. And then the team works really hard on reducing these costs down, and then you move into a different segment in the market as the price costs come down. Does that make sense, Lenny?

Lenny (00:27:13):
Yeah. Essentially charge the heavier users more to counteract less frequent users. And essentially that drives word of mouth.

Nilan Peiris (00:27:22):
Totally, but it's down to this level of, if an Australian customer calls up asking, "Where is my transfer?" That cost of that call gets allocated back to the AUD/GBP route. If a Brazilian business needs like 20 documents in order to be verified before we can give them an account, the cost of verifying check those customers goes back there, so that at a very atomic level starts happening. So yeah, as you said, the more expensive customers end up paying what they cost.

Lenny (00:27:51):
And it sounds like the more expensive markets.

Nilan Peiris (00:27:55):
Indeed, and the more expensive, systemically expensive markets. But let's get to that. So, what are the costs? So if you look at our P&L, there's just three costs at transaction level. You've got people costs, you've got the cost of risk, realized risk, and then you've got partner fees.

(00:28:16):
And so if you've got this mission of moving the world's money for almost nothing, or zero, as close to zero as you can, you've got to invest as much of your cashflow in engineering to try to engineer away these three problems. So just to take them through briefly a bit, and remember, we're trying to do this 10 times better than anyone else. So how do you really change the experience on each of them?

(00:28:40):
I'll cover a couple with you. So let's do the risk one first. There's two risks we have. We have have FX risk, you come to Wise you see your rate, and then you may send us the money a little later. If you're moving a million dollars, you can't usually move it instantly. It might take you two to three days to move it. The rate's locked, could move against us, we'd lose some money.

(00:29:01):
So that cost, if you look back, so we've halved that cost over the last few years, and you can imagine through understanding the bits of the product, they generate exposure, and limiting it, and a bunch of algorithms behind that. But the more inspiring stuff is the people costs, and the partner costs, go through each of these one at a time.

(00:29:25):
So the people costs are our customer service team, operations teams. But I like to think of that as the cost of poor quality. So you bring up customer support if the products are clear, you hire lots of people in the back office. If you haven't automated it. We get like 20% improvement year on year as we're doing that. But come back to your question, how do you step change that? How do you do a 10x better experience?

(00:29:49):
I'll share with you a story from Singapore. It's quite a fun one. Because we went to Singapore about six, seven years ago, and [inaudible 00:29:58], we asked for a license. We had 20,000 people on the wait list, or so, saying, "Wise, please come to Singapore." And we went there, we asked the regular, "Hey, can you give us a license?" They gave us the license, but they said, "You have to physically meet every single customer."

Lenny (00:30:13):
Great.

Nilan Peiris (00:30:14):
Face-to-face. And this happens, this is... Remember, they're banks that people use. So people go into banks usually, and you get face-to-face verified when you open a bank account. We're like, "You don't need to do this in Australia, in the UK, in other countries around the world." They're like, "In Singapore, for your license, you need to do this." So we actually sent a small team out to Singapore, and we opened an office through [inaudible 00:30:43], and customers... You went through this really slick flow, and then you got invited in to come see the team.

Lenny (00:30:49):
Amazing.

Nilan Peiris (00:30:50):
And customers hated it, and it was really expensive, obviously.

Lenny (00:30:56):
Yeah.

Nilan Peiris (00:30:57):
But the magic was we got the customers not to complain to us, but to complain to the government. And it took a year of lobbying, and a year of building, doing something unscalable effectively, before we got the world's first EKYC license in Singapore. So you could take a selfie, picture of your ID, and then you could get verified.

(00:31:21):
And that's what I call a 10x better experience than anyone else in the market, and that led to advocacy and word of mouth off the back of it. And that loop of getting your customers to help was also one of the learnings of word of mouth.

Lenny (00:31:35):
Was the product team involved? Were you involved in that on the ground stuff? Or was it like [inaudible 00:31:40]?

Nilan Peiris (00:31:39):
Yeah, yeah. Generally when we go [inaudible 00:31:43], we're running cross-functional teams, but this is a verification team. The team actually would verify the docs when you sent it to us. They went out to Singapore, verified them onsite, face-to-face.

(00:31:54):
So the fun bit here is why would customers help a company? And this is one of the other learnings on word of mouth. The way I think about this is that there are the rational reasons why people recommend, which we've covered. But there's these emotional ones as well. Softer ones people would call brand. I prefer to call it on the mission.

(00:32:19):
So we do our mission, which is to make the world's money move instantly at the touch of a button, for almost nothing. It was a very personal thing, it was like an internal company thing, to think our customers cared about it. And then we rebranded like eight, nine years ago, our first rebrand, and we wrote our mission and sent it to our customers.

(00:32:41):
We got more new customers from that email being forwarded around than any other kind of marketing. And I show this when I talk at conferences. This email broke all the rules of marketing. It didn't have a call to action, it didn't have a button to sign up, it didn't have anything in it, but people just forwarded it around saying, "You should check out Wise."

(00:32:59):
And it's not all the customer base, but there was a proportion of the customer base that this resonated in. And I think it's the authenticity within which they could see that we were genuinely trying to.... Trying to bring the prices down was a scheme to help us grow faster, which is kind of where it started out, was actually genuinely because founders, they were really upset about how much it cost to money.

(00:33:27):
They found good ways to solve that problem, and they're still really passionate about solving that problem. And they could see that authenticity flows through the whole company, because we got a... When you look at Wise, we're full of people on visas, and immigrants, and people that have worked, and live around the world, and struggled with this problem, and are passionate about solving it. And so they wanted to help us solve it. So the second part of this word of mouth engine is for us, we managed to get this mission thing to work.

(00:33:53):
So somehow we emotionally connect our cause, and then I see going, taking a step back, getting 10x better on price is through our customers helping us do it, which gets us even cheaper, which then brings more customers, that then creates this flywheel that's spins around.

Lenny (00:34:11):
What a flywheel you guys have built. This reminds me of a lot of different things. One is you talked about how there's the reality of the things people need, and then there's this soft, fuzzy stuff that's harder to quantify. I actually is the framework just like that on that product I talked about of instant booking.

(00:34:27):
I kind of built a roadmap around the reality of what people actually need in order to feel comfortable, guests booking instantly. And then I call it the perception, what are their fears about letting guests book instantly? And there's a lot of work to just convince them, you think you're going to get all these guests that are really scary or whatever, but in reality it never happens. It's really rare something bad happens, and if it does, we're going to cover it.

(00:34:50):
So, I think that's a really cool framework when you're trying to get people to adopt something, is think about what do they actually need? And then how do you convince them of the things that are just in their head? And it sounds like the win there was kind of this sharing your mission and your values as a business.

Nilan Peiris (00:35:05):
Yeah, it just sounds, again very tweedy, right? Tweedy, like sounds very corporate, sounds like it's never going to work, but I think it's also... I mean, Airbnb, the authenticity is there. People are passionate about making that experience work for both sides of the marketplace. It's kind of clear. So, I'm kind of taking a step back, personally very passionate about customer-led growth, and how that turns into shareholder value.

(00:35:32):
So, taking a step back, where every business I've ever worked in, it's always got these two lists, a list of things to do for your customers, and then it's got a list of things to do to make money. And you generally do everything you need to do to make money, and you do two things with the customer list, and you go, "Customer led business." And then, neat thing about wise, and I'm pretty sure you'll see the same thing on Airbnb is, we just had one list, which is this list of things that you need to do to make customers happy, and it's prioritized by impact on the really hard things. And if you do these really hard things, they have an incredible impact for customers, but hence on your growth, and on your shareholder value.

Lenny (00:36:11):
That is really interesting. Airbnb is not quite like that. It's actually become more like that with a lot of just like, "Let's build awesome products and not focus on experiments as much." So that's really interesting that prioritization basically at Wise came from, "What are people telling us?" I guess let me ask actually, how did you know what the impact would be on customers? How did you decide? Is it frequency of how often people request it? Is it, "We need to lower the cost, and so we're just going to prioritize the things that will lower prices most?"

Nilan Peiris (00:36:37):
Definitely on the journey at the beginning, you are into split testing, right? Let's try to take apart a split test on price. So, you've systemically dropped the cost. Imagine we drop the cost. The question is, do we drop the price? Do we pass that all on to customers? And do we keep some of it? And split testing on the price thing, if the split test is going to mean you end up with more revenue, it means you drop the price by 10%, and there happened to be that day, more than 10% more customers in the market who, they saw the price at one pound, but they see the price at 90p, at 10% lower, and they're like, "I wasn't going to shift at buy at one pound but I'm going to buy it 90p."

(00:37:23):
So this is pretty hard to do this. This word around conviction is one I use a lot, where you build this conviction that price is what matters. And through this incremental split test, you will take a long time to go there, but at some point you kind of go, "Actually I've got enough conviction." So there's one kind of strategic bet at the heart of Wise. That is if we have the lowest cost platform, and it's really fast, and really high quality, the world's volume will switch to us. And just marginally getting there step by step by step, and trying to track the incremental return is actually slower. And there's a point that comes that you go, "I feel really comfortable investing in price. I feel comfortable investing in speed, because I know it's going to pay back, and not necessarily this month, but eventually it will, and I need to make gains on all three levers in order to get there." Does that make sense?

Lenny (00:38:13):
Yeah, absolutely. So essentially, in that track of work, instead of everything that you did to reduce price, there wasn't an experiment to see, "What impact does this have on growth, or revenue?" Instead, it's just, "We know reducing price is going to help us grow, and so we're just going to track how much we're cutting price." And that's essentially the goals, I imagine, were just cut the price by some amount, find a way to make it this much cheaper every, say, quarter, or year.

Nilan Peiris (00:38:37):
Yeah, that's it. You got it. And that conviction is core. That extends to our product management approach on the UX. So this is a great line for use internally, I'm sure you've heard it, "You can't split test your way to love." So, this experiment led product management approach, where you throw a bunch of things on the wall, and then you kind of see what sticks, and generally we don't advocate this. Obviously there's a bit of it that happens, but generally don't advocate it. Mainly because engineering is expensive, and you can actually figure out what matters to customers through other means. Some of the techniques we've talked, and build it.

(00:39:21):
There's a story I like to share. I had a product manager join our refer a friend team, viral growth team, and invite team, and after a quarter, I said, "So what are you going to build?" And he's like, "I'm going to test everything. I'm going to test the landing page, I'm going to test the subject line, I'm going to test the program so I don't know yet till run through all the tests, then I'm going to come back and tell you what I'm going to build."

(00:39:47):
I said, "You're not going to do this. I'm going to give you three weeks and you're going to pick one thing to change, but you're going to go talk to people, and get quantitative insights, and build your own gut feel around what matters, and then launch it, and submit, test it, and see if it works." But this thing of building conviction on what matters, and I watch how teams slowly build this and you need the data there to make sure it doesn't become a hubris, right? That enables you to make much bigger changes than just experimenting away, and it forces you to get clear on what actually is the problem to solve here, and how do I solve it really, really well? Does that make sense, Lenny, Do you disagree? It's a bit provocative there. Some people are pretty strong in the expert led approach.

Lenny (00:40:30):
No, there's many ways to do it. There's no right way, and it's working. So I'm not going to argue.

(00:40:35):
This episode is brought to you by Masterworks, the premier art investing platform, where some everyday investors have earned a 35% net return. Yes, a 35% net return alongside 16 other exits, including 10 and 17% net returns. Contemporary art has outpaced the S&P 500 by 136% over the last 27 years. Citibank and Deloitte have reported that contemporary art has performed well as an inflation hedge, and the appreciation is almost entirely uncorrelated to other financial markets. Even the CEO of BlackRock, Larry Fink, has said it's one of the greatest stores of wealth internationally. However, there's never been a way to invest in it practically without spending millions. But now Masterworks allows almost anyone to invest in works by artists like Banksy, Basquiat, and Monet.

(00:41:22):
In fact, Masterworks latest exit just last month delivered another double-digit annualized net return for their investors since the New York Times first reported on them in 2019, they've grown to over 800,000 users, and had some new offerings sell out in literal minutes. But you get special access and can jump the wait list queue at masterworks.art/lenny. As with any investment, past performance is not indicative of future performance. Investing involves risk. See important regulations and disclosures and aggregate advisory performance masterworks.com/cv. Again for special access to skip the wait list, go to masterworks.art/lenny.

(00:42:00):
So, what I'm hearing essentially, the experimentation culture at Wise is instead of just run, test everything that you're thinking about, throw out a bunch of ideas and see how they go, it's more, "Let's just decide we believe in this idea, and let's go bigger there, and run an experiment. Maybe not even." Is that roughly how you think about it?

Nilan Peiris (00:42:18):
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And is that something that you've seen yourself in practice elsewhere?

Lenny (00:42:23):
It's interesting how many parallels there are to Airbnb, because this is what Airbnb is doing now. There's been a shift recently, where instead of everything is very data experiment driven, it's very just like, "Let's build really great products that the founders are really excited about, and that the execs are hearing from people. Let's just build things that are awesome and launch them, and we believe things will grow." And Airbnb is doing great.

Nilan Peiris (00:42:47):
Yeah, the challenge of this is because it does become this risk thing of where it's like, okay, it's someone's opinion, so I think it's X, right? And everyone thinks they're kind of Steve Jobs type thing.

Lenny (00:43:00):
Yeah. That's right.

Nilan Peiris (00:43:01):
You have some way of using data to get this conviction, and show why this is what we should do, but try to learn how to build that faster CME, slight difference. So, it's less product managers or me saying, "Hey guys, I think it's X." It's generally data driven, and qualitative insights driven as well.

Lenny (00:43:23):
Personally, I would always index towards running experiments just to put this out there, but I think in this case, it makes sense, where you just know, "We need to do these three things, just make it cheaper, make it faster." You don't need to AB test every idea there. Probably the main downside of not testing everything is you may be hurting things along the way, and you may not know it.

Nilan Peiris (00:43:42):
I mean, yeah, so we definitely do... So you're right. But there's a very different thing to when you look at the... From a sample size perspective, you want to do a beta, and understand the negative impact. It's a holdout group that's smaller, than a test to get a significance. It's quite define the criteria to know whether something is breaking, is generally a different thing to say, is this a material result in a test? Yeah.

Lenny (00:44:09):
And along those lines, the other benefit of experimentation is you know the impact. And so, team members can understand, "Here's what I did this quarter, this year." How do you think about just like performance reviews, and people's impact, and that kind of thing?

Nilan Peiris (00:44:21):
Yeah, that's a good one. This one is definitely an ongoing debate. So, I generally ask teams what's their impact? So, every quarter, every team, what... [inaudible 00:44:29] or Kristo will ask, "What did you ship?" And I generally ask, "How many people used it? What was the impact on volume?" Et cetera. And we have analyst teams that can answer this either with pre-post analysis, all kinds of techniques, or all through split tests. We generally have this, the debate is where the analysis slows us down, and we wouldn't make a decision off the back of the analysis.

(00:44:54):
And then, this generally is what you said, where the team needs a validation, mainly for themselves, and maybe a little performance, but not too much. And so, there were ways in which you can maybe get some read on it that isn't quite as strong as a split test, which we'd use in these things. It's more just getting some... You can understand that people worried when you do split tests that slow down the release of something, but in order to get impact, if you know you're not going to roll it back, then okay, you should just roll it out, and try to reduce the need for that validation.

Lenny (00:45:31):
I think that there's an interesting correlation between products that grow through word of mouth, and less need to experiment with everything. Airbnb is also actually 70% of growth is word of mouth from the last stat that I heard. And then you think about all these social consumer apps, they mostly grow through people sharing with their friends, and a lot of them come from just the founder's intuition of what a great product's going to be. I think about Snapchat, and the recent mobile social apps. And so I think maybe there's something there about just as a founder, trusting your gut more often. But then it becomes difficult as you grow. You have to delegate, and then you have to trust people on your team making the right decisions. I guess, is there anything there that you've learned about just trusting individual product teams to make decisions that you can't for sure know are positive or negative without running experiments?

Nilan Peiris (00:46:23):
So, as I say, almost everything we do, we have some way of understanding the impact. So, that's always there. We definitely have things where the team does something where Kristo or I will say, "This is just crazy. There's no way they're going to use this." And then we have a culture where people are encouraged to do these things, if they believe in it.

Lenny (00:46:48):
Is there an example of that?

Nilan Peiris (00:46:49):
Yeah, a couple. So the one [inaudible 00:46:52] that my head of SEO always talks about is a currency converter. So, the Wise homepage is a pretty good currency converter. It's got a decent one on there. There's tons of traffic on currency converter. So, if you click Wise link, now it's a little bit hidden on send, it's there. It's pretty cool. Currency converter.

Lenny (00:47:10):
Oh I see it at the bottom there. Yeah, it's like [inaudible 00:47:13].

Nilan Peiris (00:47:14):
But if you Google currency converter, there's tons of traffic, and that converter on the Wise homepage obviously includes our price, and lets you sign up. And so, should we build a currency convertor? Should we try to capture this traffic? Is it more effective to try to push our own product there? And you can kind of understand why it was Kristo, actually not me, that was like, "This is a crazy idea." And the founder, and the SEO team went out and built it, and it's huge now, in terms of visits. I think we've got a currency convertor app out there. I think we've got [inaudible 00:47:51] out there, and yeah, people discover wise through that, as an example of off-topic traffic, but that's a good example of one of those things where yeah, the founder said, "No," or, "That's' a bad idea," and we kind of went ahead, and did it anyway.

Lenny (00:48:07):
Awesome. I'm just thinking about broadly all the things we've been talking about. There's a couple of things that were floating around in my head. One is, reminds me of Amazon, where Jeff Bezos realized there are things that are going to be always true with Amazon. People always want cheaper prices, they want faster shipping. And I think there's something else. And it feels like you guys found the same sort of thing. What are the three things people always want with a money transfer product? And let's just make those as incredible as possible, and in your eyes, make them 10 times better than what anyone else has out there.

Nilan Peiris (00:48:40):
Yeah, totally. The business one example is relevant, and use it a lot when we talk to investors in the market, [inaudible 00:48:49] public helps validate this low cost, cutting price story. What's interesting is what changed though. So we started with transfers, but we got to account, and then we got to enterprise. Just what changed was we realized with account, if you just have to move $10, you're not going to download an app and do it. If you do it once, you're just going to do it in your bank. And so, that was a little bit of the insight behind building the Wise account, and we kind of focused on, there's a real problem with international banking.

(00:49:22):
So, really good example is for businesses. So if you are a business, say, in... Say a business in Europe, you've got a customer in Australia, and you want to get paid, you send them an invoice in Euros, and someday, some money's going to turn up in your account, you're like, "I don't know." They paid you an AUD, it got changed by three banks on the way through. You don't know what it is. What you'd love to do is invoice them in AUD, and get AUD in your bank account. You might even have people who need to pay in AUD, so you have to call to keep it there. But to get an Australian bank account, I found out, you need to fly to Australia, you need to incorporate a business in Australia, you need to go to a bank with all those papers, and then they will give you an Australian bank account number.

Lenny (00:50:06):
Great.

Nilan Peiris (00:50:07):
So with Wise, you can get an Australian bank account number with three clicks. Anyone can, and any business can, and you get an Australian balance, and a US, and a UK, and a Swiss bank. And this is killer for businesses that receive money internationally. And then the next big jump we did, and for consumers, so there are plenty of people, if all your banking is in the US, you probably shouldn't use Wise, but if you're somebody who uses another currency a lot, then you probably should use us as your primary bank.

(00:50:37):
There's some people, for example, who live in one country and get paid in another currency, and this is... Wise is great as an account for managing that. And we found with that, we got about... As we launched the account in markets, it was about a 20 to 30% more volume, cross-border volume coming into Wise from that market. Just a good example of how, while it's not price, not speed, you could argue is kind of ease of use, but we had to evolve it in order to get to the next tranche of the market. Does that make sense, Lenny?

Lenny (00:51:07):
Absolutely. And it all just comes back from what would be the theoretical ideal situation for people transferring money, say from Australia. And what I'm hearing is just find all the little friction points that get in the way. In this case you're like, "Okay, we'll create you an Australian bank account, and you don't even worry about it."

Nilan Peiris (00:51:25):
Yeah, that's exactly it. And so now then you have all these other problems, because we've got about $12.5 billion in deposits now, which is like a time. And the next problem customers are at is, "I want a return." And we quite deliberately don't have a banking license. You have to figure out, how are we going to solve that? We now put customers money in government bonds, US bonds, and when you pay with your card, it dynamically sells those bonds. And that's how we give you an interest rate, in roundabout 5% right now, given where bond rates are.

Lenny (00:51:58):
Yeah, interest rates are quite high, for better or worse. Zooming out a little bit, for folks that are starting to... Their wheels are turning, they're like, "Okay, I want to think about word of mouth, driving word of mouth. I'm going to go look at my survey results. I'm going to figure out these pillars that are driving word of mouth. I'm going to think about how to make things 10 times better." Just broadly, for someone that's starting to approach this, what would you say to them? How should they approach this? Any major learnings at a higher level, of just how to drive word of mouth for a product?

Nilan Peiris (00:52:30):
I think it just comes back to talking to customers and this is the question we've kept coming back to. What would it take to make it 10x better? And then you get clear in your head what it would take, and then it's usually the thing that everyone's looked at before and thought, it's the thing that's impossible. One more example is on the partner side. So, rather than find a cheaper bank for a banking partner, you think, well, the cheapest banking partner is the central bank. And imagine you're a startup. How the hell do you get a bank account at the central bank?

(00:53:08):
But that kind of thinking, and we now have a bank account at the Bank of England, the National Bank of Singapore, Bank of Australia. And each of these was as hard as getting that face-to-face verification thing in Singapore. It took years of lobbying, and all kinds of stuff, in order to make it happen. But it's setting your goal all the way up there. That's what enables you to build a 10x better product. That's what gets you to the word of mouth. So, the first step is getting super clear on what's the problems that my customers are caring about, worrying about? And then once you're clear there, as you said, how can I solve that completely, and what's the best it could possibly be? And then the hard bit is figuring out how to move that.

Lenny (00:53:48):
A lot of these things you're talking about are just, they sound like they are either impossible, like no way we're going to achieve that, or really, really hard. And a lot of companies, and a lot of founders, teams are just like, "Okay, we're not ever going to create a bank here. We're not going to be able to create an Australian bank account for everyone." What is it about your culture, or approach to these problems that you think that's unique to Wise that's like, "No, we're going to spend three years figuring this out, because it's that important?"

Nilan Peiris (00:54:16):
I think it's two [inaudible 00:54:17]. So one is, definitely the founders have this philosophy that unless you're doing something hard and new, it's kind of a waste of time. So, I think that also kind of runs through the culture. So, it's quite a rude awakening when people join Wise, because they're like, "Okay, I'm going to come, and just play around with a few things." You're like, "No, actually, the culture of the product team is we're super incentivized to do the hard things, and that's what's rewarded."

(00:54:46):
And that's quite hard to create the air cover. You can imagine like then in the early days and months when growth was slow, and people turned on the money taps in marketing, and you're trying to keep focused and plugging your away up these hard things, it's quite hard also to get the management cover in order to let the teams keep doing this. And then it's also hard just to turn up to work and really keep... You can imagine being in Singapore, verifying customers face-to face, thinking, "This is going nowhere, this is going nowhere, this is going nowhere." And then suddenly it changes. So that's what progress very much feels like at Wise. And we try to recognize that, and create a culture that enables that.

Lenny (00:55:21):
It feels like there's also just a lot of patience for these things. There isn't like, "We need to hit this quarterly goal. Why aren't we creating banks in Singapore yet?"

Nilan Peiris (00:55:29):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (00:55:31):
Awesome. The other kind of metaphor that's rolling around my head is something Seth Godin talks about. I don't know if you've heard of this guy, he's a marketing guru, and he has this concept that you want to build something that's remarkable, because if something is remarkable, it'll spread. And if you think about the word remarkable, it's something worth remarking about, which essentially is word of mouth.

Nilan Peiris (00:55:49):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:55:49):
And so that's his kind of mission and his, I don't know, advice to people is build something remarkable, something people will want to remark about. And clearly, you all have been doing that. And that's actually a good segue to where I wanted to go, which is around how you structure your team, and how you incentivize the team, organize teams, to achieve all these sorts of things. So, maybe just broadly, is there something unique to how you think about work structure, incentives, goals, things like that, in order to achieve these really hard things?

Nilan Peiris (00:56:17):
There's two unique lenses on this. One is in the macro-structure and one is in the micro-structure. So at the macro level, if you look at actually international banks, they don't really exist. I'm not sure if you've moved around between countries, but say you open a bank account with Citibank in the US, and then you go to Citibank in the UK, your Citibank account doesn't exist in the UK. You have to go to Citibank in the UK, and open a Citibank account. And actually, turns out, with some of these banks, to move money between your bank accounts is an international transfer. It's crazy.

(00:56:53):
So, when you take a step back, and look at how the market looks, you have at one end, international banks which are local tech stacks. So there's a core banking system in the US, and one in the UK, and one in Europe, say for Citibank, or for HSBC, but they have deep local integrations, so they're directly integrated in the payment system. Citibank in the US has got relationships, say, with the Federal Reserve, et cetera.

(00:57:20):
Other end of the spectrum you've got something like PayPal. So it's a tech company, it's got a single global tech stack. It doesn't run a additional version of PayPal in Australia than to the US, but it doesn't have deep connections. It hasn't got five central bank accounts, it hasn't got any of that. And I'd like to think of in the middle, you've got Wise, where we have a single global tech stack, and we have deep local infrastructure.

(00:57:45):
Now, from a technological perspective, just take a step back and think through this. This is actually non-trivial to figure out how to design. So, let's take something like the onboarding flow. So, we have global product teams, one part of product teams called global product teams. So we have a single onboarding flow that will give you a Wise account, and it's the same code that runs, whether you are in Brazil, New York, or Australia.

(00:58:17):
The regulation in Australia and Brazil is really different, and it isn't black and white in any country. So, there's a bunch of... You get a bunch of things you just shouldn't do in terms of letting people get so [inaudible 00:58:31] people who shouldn't get access to accounts. And then you can need to check these people aren't using it, and different jurisdictions have completely different requirements. Example is Japan, you have to take a picture of that front of the ID, the back of the ID, and the side of your ID. It's the only country in the world that you have to do this.

Lenny (00:58:47):
Wow.

Nilan Peiris (00:58:48):
And imagine you're the product manager for onboarding, and someone tells you, "Design the onboarding flow to give somebody a bank..." Just imagine gathering all the requirements from every country in the world, because there's very little similarity. You can't just say, "I take the US," and copy it somewhere else. It's very, very, very different.

(00:59:05):
It'd take forever to try to get that, and then normalize that into the main model, and try to figure out how you're going to structure the data around this. So, it then becomes like, what is the organization structure that enables us to discover what the domain model, let's call it that, for the onboarding flow should look like. And you end up with a global product team that owns overall KPIs around conversion rate, et cetera. And you have local, regional teams that own the conversion rate, and the cost to do KYC for their market, and they contribute to the global product code base.

(00:59:44):
So we have weak product ownership, where anyone can make code change, and pull requests, and these guys owning the vision in the center. But the only way that vision can evolve is by getting the feedback from these guys in the market, as they're constantly pushing stuff forward. And through that process, artifacts start emerging, where other markets are like Japan, and so you start splitting off that, and creating subtypes for it, and slowly the model emerges from there.

(01:00:09):
And so with this structure, the thing to optimize for is a really hard one. That problem that every global business has, is how do you get this collaboration to work between the local and the global? But unlike every other business, most businesses solve this probably as you know, is you usually have the US, and then you have international. And international is usually a bump site, where everyone's arguing to get their thing prioritized, right?

Lenny (01:00:29):
That's right.

Nilan Peiris (01:00:30):
Whereas here, you're kind of letting the local teams commit directly to the code base, and then this global team's got this challenge of doing this, and we over time create sub-teams around parts of the regionalization of the structure, around different objects as they emerge. But that broadly speaking is the first problem, the global problem. And the other bit with us is this is quite unique to us, because most fintechs out there are usually in one market. Like you take Robin Hood, it was in the US, it came to the UK, they went back to the US. You take Monzo, only the UK, N26 only in Europe, Up in Australia, China, and the US. And that's because their home markets are so big, and one regulator is a ton of work to manage. And the second complexity we have is we have all of these markets we have to be in, because we're international by default. So a lot of our thinking is where do we take that, turn that into competitive advantage, and which customer base really needs that? Which is what zooms us into that positioning on the international account.

Lenny (01:01:32):
It just comes back to again, and again, again and again, doing the hard thing, knocking peoples' socks off, and it feels like that's the formula for Wise.

Nilan Peiris (01:01:41):
I think yeah, you more or less got it. So that's one bit on structure. So this global local thing, and the second one has been a bit more of a journey. So when we started early on, we ran in autonomous independent teams, all focused on KPIs, and these KPIs rolled up to make it cheaper, make it faster, make it easier to use. You can imagine like a KPI tree, and teams around bits of their KPIs, and every quarter they talk through how they move their KPI, et cetera, and this kind of worked. And the way we ran our planning is, every quarter every team would stand up and talk through its plan, get feedback from other teams, and then move on. This worked till we got to 30 teams, and then you go from doing this in the afternoon, to doing it in two days and it's just like whoa.

(01:02:27):
So, we started heading towards the Spotify model, where we group the teams in squads, and into tribes. Today, I think that autonomy is at the squad level. So the squads are around products. So, we'll have a Wise account squad, a business squad, a Wise platform, our enterprise product squad, you'll have a North Am squad that looks after the North American product, and Lat Am squad, et cetera. And then financial crime fighting, et cetera.

(01:02:57):
And inside those squads you've got the teams, and the squad... Imagine you're the director for the Wise account, but you don't have a vision for the account. You've got to say where it's going. You've got to keep your teams on track against it. The teams aren't off doing whatever they want. They kind of need to be on track, versus the overall vision, and you're accountable for the results of that squad. And squads are in tribes, the tribe provides overall leadership, and a slight, light touch strategy on the squads. And that's more or less our structure, and how we've evolved towards it.

Lenny (01:03:26):
Is there anything else along the word of mouth concept that you think would be useful for people to share? Either how you think about it, team structure, anything else?

Nilan Peiris (01:03:34):
There's one tiny bit I'll share, which was around marketing and referral. This was super interesting for me. So, we've been running it, like Airbnb, we've been running referral program for now 12 years, and after 12 years, you've kind of tested everything anyway. And like I said, by this point you have literally tested everything. So when somebody comes up with something that has a 300% increase, you're like, "Whoa, that's super interesting. What just happened?"

Lenny (01:04:03):
Wow, I'm excited for this.

Nilan Peiris (01:04:05):
And yeah, I'll share this one, because it's interesting. So we run many variants of refer a friend, where you'll get different kinds of benefit. We tried chocolate, we tried money, we've tried $200, $500, $10, you get some, I get some money, all kinds of things. More or less headed towards three for $100, generally it's a sweet spot. Anyway, it's a pretty creative PM there. And he was again talking to customers, and he spotted this thing, which is pretty cool, which is when you do a transfer with Wise, at the end you get this email, the email says, "Well done." Then it says, "Your money's there in the other person's account, and you saved $10 on this transfer." And he got this insight, which was pretty awesome, was he realized that people believed they saved money, but they didn't believe the number. And he then thought, what would it take to get them to believe the number?

Lenny (01:05:05):
That seems right.

Nilan Peiris (01:05:07):
And so the fun bit was the approach. So then him and a designer sat there and they sketched out an alternative email, and they went down to the coffee shop downstairs, and they showed it to people, and they said... Just asked them what they thought, and they kept iterating it until they got to a graph. And this graph is like this... When you go through a money transfer thing, it pops up in places, behind the compare button. And this graph shows with your bank, when you send, how much is in the rate hidden as... This is how much you're sending, this is how much they're taking in the rate in a fee, and this is how much you can see in the fee, because the fees are hidden in the rates with banks. And then this is with Wise.

(01:05:45):
And they iterate this graph to the point that people looked at like, "Oh my God, I'm never using my bank again. This number... This is crazy." And then they put this graph on the success page when you did a transfer. Saying, "You saved this." And put a share button in there, and invite your friends button, and that's what really drove it. And when you fast-forward to today, we've now got... So it's actually quite hard. So, we now have I think about 70 bank accounts around the world. So, I think the top three accounts, banks in the world, where we log onto every day, and then we log the price and the quote for a bunch of different routes into a file. You can imagine how hard is. I think I personally have about 17 of these still in my name, that I've opened up around the world to help the team get going. But that's kind of one of the biggest word of mouth growth, or referral insights. I've got to this comparison thing, made into our marketing, made into our homepage, just went everywhere up from that insight.

Lenny (01:06:46):
And you said that that like 3x'd the sharing rate?

Nilan Peiris (01:06:50):
Yeah, that 3x'd the sharing rate. So we always had the share button after you completed a transfer. But putting that there with this graph, and that kind of got me to this, I'm curious on your take on this, on this definition of product marketing, where customers use the product, and they think they got this value, but when they actually know the value they get. So we got this on speed as well, where we're doing instant transfers, and customers wouldn't know it was instant.

(01:07:21):
So when you get an instant transfer, there's like this wizzy animation at the end, and you kind of know the money's in the other person's account, ready to spend. And again, you see this big jump in referral rate when that happens, but people need to know it's happened. And closing this delta between what you've done, and what's perceived to be done is what I call product marketing within the product. And that in its own right is a discipline, I've learned.

Lenny (01:07:43):
That's an awesome insight. It comes back to this framework we talked about of reality and perception, in a flip way, instead of getting people to adopt something, it's to appreciate the work you've done to make it remarkable, to make them understand how remarkable it really is.

Nilan Peiris (01:07:56):
Yeah, that was it. And that's something I'm continuously learning about yeah, as we go, as well.

Lenny (01:08:01):
That is extremely interesting. Before we get to our very exciting lightning round, I know you also do a bunch of charity work, and I wanted to give you a chance to share what you're doing there.

Nilan Peiris (01:08:12):
Thanks, Lenny. So, less charity, essentially came out of angel investing, is probably the way to say it. So I invest in startups, generally fintechs, mission led founders, word of mouth type stuff, all the stuff we've been talking about, that I'm passionate about. It is less investing, more helping, and yeah, just getting through the angel route. And then over time, I realized the thing I'm most passionate about is market failures. So generally I find that the invisible hand means most human needs get fulfilled by the market, but there are a few things that don't, and there's a couple of exciting startups out there who work really hard in this space. A couple are Beam in the UK, working on homelessness, Affinity and Neobank in Ghana. And so, this type of thing is stuff I'm most passionate about. So, if any of your listeners out there know anyone doing anything of that kind, trying to solve these kinds of hard problems, definitely reach out, always keen to talk.

Lenny (01:09:14):
Awesome. And we'll link to those two you mentioned in the show notes just in case people want to check them out. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Nilan Peiris (01:09:22):
Let's go for it.

Lenny (01:09:23):
Let's do it. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Nilan Peiris (01:09:29):
Two, one's at the other ends of the spectrum. So one is... This sounds terribly pretentious Crime and Punishment, and the other one is Midnight's Children by Salman Rushdie. I read a lot, I'm very passionate about reading, fiction, mainly. I don't read... Nonfiction is too much like work. And so, I generally need to read before I go to bed to decompress my brain. It's generally escapist type stuff. But I'm curious what you think of this, but for me authors are people that create people with words.

(01:10:03):
Like you say artist is a good artists if it's... Makes a good likeness to somebody, but imagine that you create somebody with words, and that person feels real, so they have some insight into the human condition. And what's amazing is if you learn something about what it means to be human from reading that. So at that end of the scale, Dostoevsky, Crime and Punishment, where this guy kills somebody, and it just eats him up. It's a pretty amazing book. It's not as heavy as it sounds, but books like that are pretty awesome. So, I recommend that a lot.

(01:10:37):
And the other end of the scale is sometimes you read a book and there's a single sentence where each word has been just stitched together, and it's like, again, a work of art, and there, Rushdie is probably the pinnacle for me, of Midnight's Children, which is about partition in India, which is pretty... Through a metaphor, it's pretty amazing.

Lenny (01:10:57):
It's a beautiful answer. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Nilan Peiris (01:11:02):
Oh gosh, I am not... I don't love [inaudible 01:11:05] got TV, but we had rented Barbie for the kids. That one, probably the last movie.

Lenny (01:11:12):
I just watched that too. So good.

Nilan Peiris (01:11:13):
Good.

Lenny (01:11:15):
You can actually stream it now. I don't know when this comes out, but it just-

Nilan Peiris (01:11:17):
Oh wow.

Lenny (01:11:18):
Yeah, you can watch it at home. But it's not cheap. I think it's like 20 bucks in the US.

Nilan Peiris (01:11:23):
Oh geez.

Lenny (01:11:24):
What is a favorite interview question you like to ask candidates when you're interviewing them?

Nilan Peiris (01:11:28):
Yeah, so I only ask two. I got down to asking just two questions over time. The first one's probably my favorite, which is, what is it that most frustrates you about... Instead of why you're leaving, what frustrates you the most about where you're working right now? And this is as people always tell you why they want to join Wise, or join whatever company you're coming to, and that's not that interesting. But what's interesting, trying to figure out, is what they're running away from. And usually there's something broken there, that's really wound them up. But what's more interesting is they've been unable to fix it. And so, in asking this question, and probing, you kind of get quite good at getting a sense of what is their limit, what's the thing they found, and what did they get stuck with? And you kind of think, "Okay, you're going to run into that here every day, every week? Or... You should be fine." And that's kind of why I ask that question.

Lenny (01:12:24):
I love that. What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really like?

Nilan Peiris (01:12:29):
I recently switched to Arc Browser.

Lenny (01:12:29):
That's what I use.

Nilan Peiris (01:12:35):
And yeah, the onboarding flow was mind-blowingly good.

Lenny (01:12:37):
That's exactly how I felt. I had to tweet about it. It's like, [inaudible 01:12:41].

Nilan Peiris (01:12:40):
Yeah, I sent it to my onboarding team, and everyone. And what I loved about it is, it's clearly like if you could try to use Arc with the same way you use Chrome, you just get really frustrated. But if you use it the way they want you to use, it'd be amazing. So, for figuring out how to get people to engage with, you need to use this fundamentally differently. They manage to almost get me to use it the right way. Still struggling a little bit with it, but that I thought was really clever.

Lenny (01:13:12):
Awesome choice. We had Josh, the CEO of the Browser Company of New York, it's called, on the podcast. And if you're interested in learning about Arc's story, definitely check out that episode. All right, next question. What is a favorite life motto that you like to repeat most to yourself, that you like to share? Anything come to mind?

Nilan Peiris (01:13:30):
The thing that defines success is the speed at which you pick yourself up.

Lenny (01:13:37):
I love that.

Nilan Peiris (01:13:37):
And that's the thing that I hold onto most, because you get knocked a lot, high growth company, and it's obviously quite... Obviously knocks you, when someone says no to an offer, when somebody leaves the company, when a product doesn't work as you think it should, when you get pushback from a partner. But yeah, if you lose four hours spinning around it, or you trying and figure out, "Okay, this happened, how do I move forward?" And just learning how to shorten that time has probably been one of the most important journeys for me.

Lenny (01:14:11):
That was an awesome answer. One final question, is there a fun cultural ritual at Wise that has stuck around for a while?

Nilan Peiris (01:14:20):
This one, my team would love to say. So, from the early days, we got everyone together from all around the world once a year. Oh, I actually did it twice a year. And the founders are from Estonia, and we have 5,000 people now, so we still have about 1,800 in Estonia. So it's cheaper to flavor on Estonia. So in the old days when it was winter, winter in Estonia is not fun, but summer in Estonia is amazing, and we still do this. And the funnest bit about this is, I have a side hustle, DJ, so I get to DJ there, and it's quite fun, and embarrassing for my kids because technically I've now DJ'd in other countries.

Lenny (01:15:03):
International DJ.

Nilan Peiris (01:15:05):
That's it. That's my side hustle.

Lenny (01:15:07):
Amazing.

Nilan Peiris (01:15:08):
That's how I introduced myself to my 17-year old's friends. So, yeah.

Lenny (01:15:12):
Do you have a DJ name? Is there... Can we check you out on Spotify?

Nilan Peiris (01:15:15):
No, no, you can't check me on Spotify or anything, but yeah, it's all private. [inaudible 01:15:19].

Lenny (01:15:19):
All right. Maybe Burning Man, you could see your performance next year.

Nilan Peiris (01:15:23):
Maybe.

Lenny (01:15:24):
Nilan, thank you so much for being here. We talked a lot about word of mouth. I feel like this episode is going to spread 100% through word of mouth. Can't wait for people to listen to it. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Nilan Peiris (01:15:37):
You can find me online on Twitter, nilanp, and always love to hear product feedback by email, by tweet, by LinkedIn. Generally by tweet is best, easiest for me to pick up, and my team to reach into directly. So, hit me up that way. And most useful for me, yeah, product feedback, and as I said, other people working on hard problems that need help, do reach out.

Lenny (01:16:03):
Amazing. Nilan, thank you so much for being here.

Nilan Peiris (01:16:06):
Thank you for your time. Take care, Lenny.

Lenny (01:16:08):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating, or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes, or learn more about the show lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny (00:00:00):
You've worked at so many great companies. At YouTube, when you joined, my understanding is YouTube was losing a lot of money.

Noam Lovinsky (00:00:05):
There were many times where Google leadership reconsidered the acquisition and, "Should we sell YouTube?" if you can believe it or not.

Lenny (00:00:11):
At Thumbtack, it looks like you went from 1 to -1 and then back to 1.

Noam Lovinsky (00:00:15):
I remember in a board meeting, the new model really started to show legs and one of the board members, Brian Schreier at Sequoia, said it was the prettiest smile graph that he had ever seen.

Lenny (00:00:23):
When you were at Facebook, you built what is called the New Product Experimentation team trying to create a startup within a startup.

Noam Lovinsky (00:00:29):
You're thinking on a different time horizon. If you're a large organization and you do some performance management process twice a year and you're 0 to 1 incubator, you've already killed it. It's the wrong incentive.

Lenny (00:00:39):
As the chief product officer of Grammarly, I'm curious what word you most often misspelled?

Noam Lovinsky (00:00:47):
The.

Lenny (00:00:47):
You do T-E-H?

Noam Lovinsky (00:00:48):
T-E-H. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Lenny (00:00:49):
Oh man.

(00:00:53):
Today my guest is Noam Lovinsky. Noam is currently chief product officer at Grammarly. Previously, he was an early PM at YouTube where he spent five years leading the creator product experience and then the broader YouTube consumer product experience. He then went on to take on the chief product officer role at Thumbtack, which involved helping the company reignite growth after a downturn caused by some changes Google made in SEO. He then went on to Facebook where he created the New Product Experimentation team whose charter was to incubate big new ideas protected from the larger Facebook org.

(00:01:26):
Noam has such a unique set of experiences taking products from 0 to 1, from -1 to 1, from 1 to 100, and even starting his own companies. He's never really been on a podcast before and he rarely ever tweets or post anything online, which we actually talk about. In our conversation, we walk through the lessons that he's learned through his amazing career at YouTube, Facebook, Thumbtack, and at Grammarly. We talk about when it makes sense to kill your project at a company, when it makes sense to ask to be layered at a company, why you should be keeping a nose out for which products matter most at a business and to find those products, why you need to diversify your growth channels at your business, why you should be finding work that is going to most stretch you to help you advance in your career, a bunch of advice for creating space for innovation within a large company and so much more. Noam is such a gem and I'm really excited to share his wisdom with you.

(00:02:20):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow this podcast in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Noam Lovinsky after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:36):
This episode is brought to you by Whimsical, the iterative product workspace. Whimsical helps product managers build clarity and shared understanding faster with tools designed for solving product challenges. With Whimsical, you can easily explore new concepts using drag and drop wireframe and diagram components, create rich product briefs that show and sell your thinking, and keep your team aligned with one source of truth for all of your build requirements. Whimsical also has a library of easy to use templates from product leaders like myself, including a project proposal one pager and a go-to market worksheet. Give them a try and see how fast and easy it is to build clarity with Whimsical. Sign up at whimsical.com/lenny for 20% off a Whimsical Pro plan. That's whimsical.com/lenny.

(00:03:27):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market leading trust management platform helps you continuously monitor compliance alongside reporting and tracking risks. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny.

(00:04:22):
Noam, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Noam Lovinsky (00:04:25):
Thanks for having me, Lenny.

Lenny (00:04:27):
It's absolutely my pleasure. I've heard so many great things about you from so many people. I think you're friends with a lot of guests that have been on this podcast. Something that I find really interesting about you and really respect about you is that you've worked at so many great companies and you've done so many big things in your career, but you barely ever tweet. You don't have a newsletter. I don't see many things on LinkedIn. I don't think you've even been on a podcast before. I think the only evidence I can find that you exist is you have this YouTube channel that's just like you go-karting and kids and people wishing you a happy birthday.

Noam Lovinsky (00:05:00):
Oh gosh, I should go monitor that. I forgot about that.

Lenny (00:05:05):
You might want to go find it now.

Noam Lovinsky (00:05:09):
Yeah, yeah, yeah that's funny. Yeah, it's funny. I think about that a lot, like am I doing something wrong? Should I be putting more effort in that? I mean, it's funny that you mentioned newsletter. I spend a lot of time with the Substack team's. I've been a very active advisor there. The team is fantastic by the way. And I think about it. Am I doing something wrong in my career by not doing that? But just to be honest, it doesn't come authentically to me. It doesn't come naturally to me. I get really focused on the thing that I'm working on and get really deep in the thing that I am working on and I have a hard time kind of multitasking a lot outside of that to be totally honest. The way that I kind of get to know the industry and other teams or whatnot is just through working with people.

(00:05:58):
I'm not a very big networker. I'm not saying that there's anything wrong with that. I wish I were better at that. I get to know people by doing work with them, by helping them. And it doesn't necessarily scale in the same way that Twitter does, but it's served me well so far and it's more kind of authentic and it's what comes more natural to me. And so that's how I do it. So I'm doing a lot of coffees. I'm meeting people that way. I'm not doing a lot of tweeting or writing of newsletters. Maybe one day, but that's not me today.

Lenny (00:06:31):
So I think this is an awesome example of you can be incredibly successful as a product manager and as anyone in tech not investing time posting online. I am going to incriminate myself here, but I feel like the advice I always share with people is the best people are not spending time tweeting and talking online and sharing on LinkedIn. They're just doing the work. They don't have time for that sort of thing. And I think you're a great example of that. Is there anything along those lines that you share with folks that are just like, "Hey, should I be investing time here?"

Noam Lovinsky (00:06:59):
I think everyone can chart their own path and has a way that is sort of authentic to them and leans on their strengths. What I often coach people is, do what you like. You're generally going to be a lot better at the things that really fill you up that really get you excited. Life is short. There's so many things to be doing out there. We're so lucky. The number of interesting waves of technology that I've experienced, it just makes me feel like it's going to keep happening for a long time. We're very fortunate to be born in the time that we are and have the opportunities that we are. So why spend your time doing something that doesn't feel good because you think that it might lead to some success, where if you lean on what's authentic to you and what makes you happy, chances are you're going to be one of the best people at those things?

Lenny (00:07:49):
I love that advice. And I think it's so important. I think there's a lot of pressure on people too. "I need to do this, I need to do that."

Noam Lovinsky (00:07:49):
Totally.

Lenny (00:07:55):
"I need to tweet, I need to share content to be successful." This comes up a lot in this podcast, that the more you could just stick close to what gives you energy and what you enjoy doing, oftentimes that leads to things you wouldn't expect in a lot of success.

(00:08:07):
Speaking of that, looking at your career arc, I noticed a really interesting pattern and a really diverse set of experiences. So just kind of talking through places you've been. At Facebook, you worked on 0 to 1 stuff. At YouTube, the way I see it as you almost went from -1 to 1. At Thumbtack, it looks like you went from 1 to -1 and then back to 1. So it's like a really unique turnaround story. And then with Grammarly it feels like it's like, I don't know, 1 or I don't know, 5 to 100, or wherever you end up taking it. So I thought it'd be fun to talk through each of these experiences because they're such unique approaches or such unique experiences and see what lessons and wisdom we can extract from your journey.

Noam Lovinsky (00:08:51):
That sounds great. Yeah.

Lenny (00:08:52):
Okay, sweet. So I'm thinking reverse chronologically, we start with YouTube, which the way I see it is it's kind of -1 to 1. When you join, my understanding is YouTube was losing a lot of money. When you left, they were not losing money. And I was actually just looking, they're valued apparently at $200 billion today, YouTube as a business. I know you haven't been there for a while, but great work. What lessons did you take away from that journey? What stories come to mind from that part of your career that might be helpful to people?

Noam Lovinsky (00:09:21):
Maybe first to start looking with why hop around these experiences. I always tell people I feel like I'm an IC trapped in a manager's body sometimes. Fundamentally, I like to build, that's why I do this. I like to make things. And so sometimes the more fun way to make things is to start something and sometimes the better way to make things in the situation that I'm in is to try to support teams and lead through teams.

(00:09:50):
And so I joined YouTube through an acquisition of a company I started. In the beginning, what I was doing there is just rebuilding that product on Google infrastructure and for YouTube customers. And maybe the first lesson was actually to look around at what the rest of the team was doing and be really honest and open about the relative priority of the thing that you're working on even if it might lead to your project getting canceled.

(00:10:26):
So one of the things that I remember doing really on is actually talking to the leadership team and being like, "I don't think we should be putting 50 engineers on this project. Looking at the rest of the roadmap and the rest of the priorities, excuse me, I think this team would likely be better served elsewhere." Even though that was likely negotiating my way out of a job in month three, I don't know, I kind of felt like that was the right thing for the team and for the business.

(00:10:57):
And then that started a very interesting journey because from there, basically the leadership was like, "You're right. We're going to wind that down and build some of those features into the existing product. And now you, you come and lead this focus area, we're calling the creator focus area." So I went from basically rebuilding the product that our startup had built to leading one of the three focus areas at YouTube. There was the viewer team, the creator team, and the advertiser team. And Hunter Walk, who's amazing, was leading the viewer team. And Shishir Mehrotra, who's also very amazing, was leading the advertising team.

Lenny (00:11:39):
What an alumni community.

Noam Lovinsky (00:11:41):
There was me. I was sort of like 29-year-old startupy guy working with these guys who were awesome. And YouTube in general, and continues to be, an incredible team. And so I think that was a first really good lesson. That in the right organizations, even in large organizations, advocate for what's best for the team, advocate for what's best for the organization even if that means that it puts you at a particular difficult moment. If it is a healthy team that rewards those sorts of decisions and actions, good things will happen. If it's not, that's good to know too. That's good to know early. So that's one thing that comes to mind.

(00:12:32):
Maybe one other I would say atypical career choice that I made shortly thereafter is then when I was put in that role, I really struggled in that role. I was reporting to the CEO at the time, a guy named Salar Kamangar, who's also awesome, Google's 6th employee and just learned a ton from him, like an incredible strategic thinker. But he was asking me questions that I felt like they were from a different planet. I was like, I didn't know what they meant and he just thought in a different way, a different level or different scale and that's still something that I was learning. Eventually I figured it out, but I was really struggling in that moment. I had a really good relationship with both Hunter and Shishir and they really helped me through that. And eventually, I went to Salar and said, "Hey, I think I should actually report to Hunter. I think this would work better if we kind of combined the organizations this way and then we divided and conquered this way."

(00:13:41):
And again, very atypical, no one has ever come to me in my career and said, "I would like you to layer me in this other person." But in that moment I was just like, "This is how I will do better work. This is how I will get better support. I will be happier and more productive and it'll be better for the team." And you know what? For me anyway, I was right. We made that change. Hunter was a fantastic manager and support at YouTube. I learned a ton, grew a lot. And then eventually when he moved on, Shishir took over the organization and then I moved into the viewer part of the organization, which is where I spent the rest of my time there, which was leading and supporting the viewer PM team at YouTube.

Lenny (00:14:32):
These stories are amazing. It connects to your point that you're kind of an, I see, an inner child I see, where you keep trying to kill your career by accident. Like, "Now, let's kill this project I'm working on. I'm going to demote myself a little bit." But clearly it's worked out. Is there anything that you saw that gave you that confidence that, "This is actually going to be okay"? Because again, people don't normally think this is how you get ahead in your career, is you kill your team and you layer yourself.

Noam Lovinsky (00:14:58):
Yeah, I mean I think having a broader view of the company strategy, having an instinct for what we should be doing and why and how I might prioritize all of these investments if I were given the opportunity to do that, I think internalizing that and understanding that and then trying to align whatever is under your influence towards that overall goal is very helpful and made me feel like, "I'm pretty confident this is going to be okay because it will lead to better results for the organization given what we're trying to do. And so as long as I'm trying to push decisions or actions that actually lead to better results, if it's a healthy culture and organization, I should be okay."

(00:15:47):
I think that the other thing is, just over the years, I got extremely lucky. The first job that I got out of school was an incredible group of people and it gave me a nose for talent. It gave me a nose for what great feels like and what a high functioning team feels like. It's hard to know that without experiencing that. And so in the moments, YouTube was also one of those teams, Grammarly is one of those teams, Thumbtack was one of those teams. Being able to sniff that out when you're trying to choose the next team is very important. But I think that's another thing that gave me confidence. I learned these people well enough, Hunter, Shishir, et cetera, to have the instinct that the right thing will happen, like this will be better for me and the broader team.

Lenny (00:16:49):
Got it. So the key there is just you have to trust that the team around you is good enough, that you're not going to be pushed off into a corner. I think you made a really profound point here that a lot of people don't get about the job of a product leader and a product manager, that a big part of your job is to think about what is best for the business and work backwards from that. Not necessarily what's the best thing for the user is the highest priority, not necessarily what's the best thing for my team and how do I hit the goals that I'm obsessed with. It's what is going to be best for the business broadly and then make decisions there. Is there anything more you can say there about just how powerful that is as a way of thinking about prioritization and decisions as a product manager?

Noam Lovinsky (00:17:31):
Yeah, it's a great question. I mean, I think ideally, things that are best for the customer, there's high overlap with that with things that are best for the business, but not always, right? And I think figuring out some principles that help guide those sorts of conflicts can be really, really helpful. At Thumbtack, we had principles about which sides of the marketplace we wanted to serve in which order and when we serve Thumbtack. So it was customers first, pros second, and then Thumbtack last. And that's actually the first two... Saying Thumbtack last is the easy thing to say. Actually doing it in action I think is a very different thing. But that first one of like, should we... Especially when you're starting a marketplace, as you know well, Lenny, supply is so critical. Many marketplaces live and die by the quality and liquidity and supply. And so why would you focus on customers first and the Thumbtack perspective and supply are the pros, the people that you hire?

(00:18:41):
Well, we always just felt that what the pros need from us is more customers. What the pros need from us is high quality customers. And so if we really try to make a great customer experience that attracts more customers, helps them find the right pros, provides the highest quality customers, then that will therefore be better for the pros. And so that's how we should prioritize. If we do those things right, then the business will benefit, right? And so doing things like raising prices because we think it's good for the business, even though it causes liquidity issues in the marketplace might be a little bit of a local maxima, locally optimizing rather than globally optimizing. So I think sometimes in these sorts of questions, trying to establish some set of guiding principles that help navigate some of these more ambiguous or thorny questions can be really helpful.

Lenny (00:19:38):
I want to circle back to this first point you made, an experience you had convincing people that your first project shouldn't be something you work on. How long do you stick with something that isn't going well and then decide, "Okay, let's convince people this is something I should move on from," versus you don't want to give up on a project quickly, you want to give it a shot?

Noam Lovinsky (00:19:56):
I mean, look, I don't know that it's a perfect answer, but I think the reality is just that what kills most projects most early companies is stamina. And I think that we all need to work on being more resilient about kind of like, I remember at Thumbtack, Marco, the CEO, we used to say that it feels like we're running uphill and chewing glass, and you're kind of like, "That's right, we want to do that. That's good for us. Take our medicine." So you want to practice that sort of resiliency. But ultimately, I think that what starts to happen is you start to lose the stamina and you're just not bringing your best self to the situation.

(00:20:42):
And so many of these things that are so high ambiguity where you don't know exactly what to build or you don't know exactly, you're not getting the signal you need or the feedback you need to be able to hone it in and know that you're doing something well. They require just an ungodly level of faith and stamina. And so that's sort of what I look to. When you see a team that is motivated, that is building something like they're really excited about, I mean just the inertia, the quality, it's like a whole different game where when you see a team that's sort of down and out and they've really been hitting their head against the wall for a long time, sometimes they just need a change of scene, a change of pace, and they get to a much better situation. So my honest answer is, yeah, it's the, when do you run out of steam is usually the question. I think that happens usually like in the startup case, a lot of times before you run out money or these other things.

Lenny (00:21:48):
We've talked about Thumbtack a couple of times now, so let's talk about that. I love this description of running a pill, chewing glass. My understanding is when you joined, things were going well, and then things started to go much less well, and then you helped turn things around. Talk about that part of your journey and what you learned from that time.

Noam Lovinsky (00:22:05):
Yeah, sure. Again, really fantastic team and really strong founders. That company was just on the bleeding edge of things like SEO and growing by SEO. It was one of the best organizations that are driving growth through that channel. But I think a thing that I learned really early, which Lenny with your background you probably know as well, SEO is a sort of a live by the sword, die by the sword channel of growth. I think that one channel growth company is always a no-no. And so that's a little bit of what we had at Thumbtack.

(00:22:44):
So it was funny, because I remember when I joined and Marco and I had an agreement where it's like, "Okay, I'm going to do my three months of onboarding, listening to our new leader inheriting a team." I've always gotten advice that that's what you should do. And Marco being an entrepreneur and a hard running founder is like, "Yeah, yeah, yeah. Sure, sure." And then a month in, it's like, "All right, we got to run 2024 planning. Go." Or not 2024, sorry, at the time it was. And yeah, in the early days when I was there, Thumbtack was seeing triple digit growth. Then we had a couple SEO hits that got us down to double-digit growth. And then not too long after that, we were actually, for the first time in the company's history, seeing negative year-over-year growth and Google was just really coming down on our category as we were, by the way, trying to rebuild the whole product and change the monetization model and everything in between.

(00:23:50):
So it was a really a tough moment of how much do we kind of spend to reinforce the old model while we're sort of building the new model, kind of changing the engine while the plane is flying. I think I remember in a board meeting, once we kind of turned that around and over time and also the new model really started to show legs and really started to work, one of the board members, Brian Schreier at Sequoia, said it was the prettiest smile graph that he had ever, ever seen. It was obviously a really proud moment there.

(00:24:24):
But I think that the thing that I took away from that, which I tell PMs quite a bit, is growth masks all problems. You don't really have a, I think, true understanding of what is working well and what is not working well when you have incredible growth. YouTube was a great example of that. And at Thumbtac, it had incredible growth for quite some time, but it was essentially burning through a lot of demand. It was just dropping a lot of demand on the floor because there wasn't sufficient liquidity on the supply side to really meet that demand. The team knew and was trying to work on that problem, but it wasn't as urgent or high priority because you're having triple digit growth. What's wrong? Everything's going great, right?

(00:25:11):
And then the moment growth starts to slow or certainly when growth starts to be negative, all of a sudden the tenor in the organization really changes and you start looking at things very differently and trying to understand what's actually going on. And so I think it's actually a very healthy thing for businesses to go through as they turn into long-term sustainable businesses to have those sorts of moments, because I think otherwise it's just really challenging to identify where the true issues are. And I think as a PM, if you've only ever worked on things that grow and you've never felt the other side of that and how to help turn that around with your team, I think you lose a lot in your career if you don't experience that.

(00:25:58):
I'm kind of naturally paranoid. And especially as I manage growth, I often look at things and ask myself like, "Okay, what do I do right now if it went negative? How would I prioritize things if it went negative?" Having gone through that experience, I just look at things in a different way of urgency. I look at things at different levels of priority having gone through that experience.

Lenny (00:26:25):
With this Thumbtack story, I think it's rare that a business gets the smile graph that you described, this prettiest smile graph that this board member has ever seen. I think that is rarely the case. Usually, it doesn't come back up. Can you share what you did to help Thumbtack turn things around? I know it's very particular to Thumbtack in the business, but just anything there that would be useful to people?

Noam Lovinsky (00:26:46):
Sure. First of all, this is very much the team. It's not just things that I did. So I mean, first was turning on multiple channels of growth. Up until then, Thumbtack had tried and stopped paid channels, other organic channels like referrals, all of the typical things. And so, we just went back to first principles on a lot of that and also just kind of reformed a team around that and basically got an amazing team together. One of them, Whitney Steele is running marketing at Descript now. Another one, David Schein is running a product at HIMSS. But basically I went back to first principles on some of those growth channels and experiment on our way to much, much better results.

(00:27:42):
I think that one of the things that we were doing incorrectly at Thumbtack is Thumbtack is actually a marketplace that is actually made up of thousands of marketplaces, right? Like DJs in Philadelphia is one marketplace, DJs in Atlanta is another marketplace, contractors in Sonoma is another marketplace. And then Thumbtack is obviously the container of all of those marketplaces. I think we were just bifurcating our targeting and our growth efforts a little too narrowly, assuming we had to grow in that way market by market rather than targeting more broadly, providing the more aggregate data to Google and others, and then optimizing from there. The fact that we already had really good showing in SEO and really good patriarch and SEO helped to bolster things like SEM and then eventually Facebook as well.

(00:28:40):
Those were kind of the growth levers, but the core issue with the Thumbtack product was that it was just a very high friction customer experience that really left customers waiting. So the way that Thumbtack worked basically was a customer would find them through a search query, they would come in and they would answer a number of questions about the job they needed done, and then Thumbtack would say, "Okay, great, we'll get back to you in 24 hours." And this is a modern day experience, right?

(00:29:17):
And then what Thumbtack would do is they would take that job and they would federate it out to as many of the pros that might match the criteria, and then the pros would pay to quote to show up as a potential provider for that job. Now, I don't want to take anything away from that team because that worked phenomenally well for a really long time. And actually it's a perfect case study in like, "|Just do the scrappy thing that works to grow." And they did that very well, but the stage and size of the business when I joined it had kind of outgrown that. And the team knew that. That's obviously a very high friction experience. The idea that the customer, they're super excited, they want to hire someone, and at that moment you'd be like, "Cool, talk to you soon," not the best experience.

(00:30:06):
And the fact that you're asking your supply to put up money to even show up to customers in the first place, well, what the customers want to see is the supply. Like, "Tell me who I can hire." Also, a lot of friction on that side and also in some cases some unfair revenue on that side because if folks are paying to be seen and maybe they're looked at, but there's not really high intent, then they're not going to get the customers they want, they're going to be spending revenue, they're not going to be getting revenue back. It turns into just a bad loop obviously.

(00:30:40):
So the main thing we did is to rebuild that whole loop, change the monetization model, build a system where essentially pros could provide instant quotes. Lenny, I'm sure from Airbnb, this is very familiar, the move from request to book to instant booking. It was a very similar thing in a different kind of category of service and supply obviously. But that shift and doing that shift across those thousands of marketplaces and then finding the right friction point for monetization and when and what to charge people for and all of that change, that is what really, at its core, turned the growth engine around at Thumbtack. And it's just a real testament to those founders that they believe that, saw that, and were willing to run a pill and chew glass to get to that point. I don't know the details of the business anymore. And if I did, I wouldn't speak to it. But from what I hear, things are going well, so I think that that served the company well.

Lenny (00:31:45):
Yeah, as you were talking about that, that's exactly an experience Airbnb went through. I actually led that effort at Airbnb. It took three years of my life.

Noam Lovinsky (00:31:53):
Oh my gosh, we should talk about that one day.

Lenny (00:31:57):
Yeah, I've written about it here and there, but honestly very quietly is one of the biggest transformations Airbnb went through, shifting from I'm going to go request a book to basically every book now on Airbnb is instant. And that was a very difficult and painful journey. But looking back, I don't think Airbnb would've made it if not for that. And unlike Thumbtack, we did it before things were starting to fall apart. And actually, I was going to say the lens that we used that I find really helpful here is, you should be asking yourself, "If somebody was to come into our space and disrupt us and start now to become the new Airbnb, what would they do?"

Noam Lovinsky (00:32:33):
Yeah, totally.

Lenny (00:32:34):
And it was obvious that it'd be be make it instant, just the way it works. Welcome to Airbnb disruptor. And so, yeah.

Noam Lovinsky (00:32:40):
Another learning there is any product you work on that involves bits and atoms is exponentially harder than products that just involve bits. But it's amazing how something as seemingly simple as make an instant ends up being so incredibly deep and complicated. And especially on an existing business, making that transition while still growing is just very, very complicated. Fantastic learning I'm sure you had as well.

Lenny (00:33:07):
Very difficult to change people's expectations and behavior. This could be its own podcast episode, just changing marketplaces into an instant experience.

(00:33:14):
I wanted to circle back real quick to the first lesson you had there, which is adding new channels. I think this is a really interesting takeaway here. So essentially Thumbtack was reliant on SEO. Google slash the sword, as you described, started changing things so traffic stopped coming. I think a cool lesson here is just if you're reliant on one growth channel, which I think most companies actually are, I think most companies have one main driver, I think a lesson here is potentially before things start to fall apart, especially if you're SEO-driven, start to explore more practically paid referrals.

Noam Lovinsky (00:33:46):
Totally. I mean I think maybe it's, again, it's kind of living through that. Now, anytime I look at a product or look at a team, it's one of the first things that perks up the paranoia of just like, "Oh no. You don't want to be in that situation. Let's figure out now how you start to diversify because you just never know, like you say, when one of those might dry up."

Lenny (00:34:09):
Imagine a place where you can find all your potential customers and get your message in front of them in a cost-efficient way. If you're a B2B business, that place exists, and it's called LinkedIn.

(00:34:20):
LinkedIn ads allows you to build the right relationships, drive results, and reach your customers in a respectful environment. Two of my portfolio companies, Webflow and Census, are LinkedIn success stories. Census had a 10X increase in pipeline with a LinkedIn startup team. For Webflow, after ramping up on LinkedIn in Q4, they had the highest marketing source revenue quarter to date. With LinkedIn ads, you'll have direct access to and can build relationships with decision makers including 950 million members, 180 million senior execs, and over 10 million C-level executives. You'll be able to drive results with targeting and measurement tools built specifically for B2B. In tech, LinkedIn generated 2 to 5X higher return on ad spend than any other social media platforms. Audiences on LinkedIn have two times the buying power of the average web audience, and you'll work with a partner who respects the B2B world you operate in. Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get $100 credit on your next campaign. Just go to linkedin.com/podlenny to claim your credit. That's linkedin.com/podlenny. Terms and conditions apply.

(00:35:29):
Is there anything else from your time at Thumbtack that stands out as an interesting lesson or takeaway that you bring with you to the work you do now?

Noam Lovinsky (00:35:37):
I would say this, I think especially at the leadership level, the team that reports to the CEO, that group doesn't always have the opportunity to do a lot of project work together, right? You've got your CFO, you've got your head of sales, you've got your product and your engineering. There's just not as often as natural ways for that group to work together. And then when something happens like growth goes negative, that group is very important. And that group's ability to tackle hard things together is very important. I think that one important lesson from that is, no one can be a bystander on product strategy. Just because you've got product in your title doesn't mean you're the only one that should be thinking about product strategy certainly at that level. Certainly not in engineering.

(00:36:39):
The CFO, the head of people, everyone needs to have a seat at the table when it comes to product strategy, what the company's doing and what they're going to do to grow out of the situation that they're in. Because otherwise, in those hard times it can kind of be like a, "What have you done for me lately?" sort of a dynamic. And that's just not the right dynamic to have on that team. I'm not saying that at Thumbtack we had the right dynamic, but I think it was a really important learning in that moment of how that team, even if they didn't typically get as involved in things like product strategy and what we're building, how everyone had to be all hands on deck and really thinking about those sorts of problems because it's the only way I think you can get a whole company and team out of those situations by everyone getting involved in doing their part and pulling on the levers that they have in their area in order to do that well. I don't think it can work in any other way.

Lenny (00:37:38):
So there's a lesson there. Build a relationship with the leadership team before things start to go awry.

Noam Lovinsky (00:37:44):
That, yes. Certainly that, but I think it's also incumbent for people in our roles and engineering roles to bring strategy to that discussion, to that group, in a way that it is possible for everyone to engage and everyone to internalize and understand what it means for their area and to even have obviously a say in because they're on the leadership team at the end of the day. They should feel like their fingerprint is also on the company strategy, and as soon as it starts to feel like that's their world, that's our world. And I think that's true for any of the functions. It's true for what's happening in sales, it's true for what's happening in marketing. As product managers, we naturally need to be the connective tissue across all of that, but I think the whole leadership team at that level should feel like connective tissue across all of those functions.

Lenny (00:38:39):
Okay. Let's transition to Facebook. This is I think an example of 0 to 1. So when you were at Facebook, you built what is called the New Product Experimentation team. I actually thought it was called the New Product Experiment Experience team, but I think it's New Product Experimentation team. My understanding is the idea there is, instead of Facebook having to buy the next Instagram and WhatsApp and all the things basically incubate startups within Facebook in a stabled concept, a startup within a startup, create all these startups within a startup. And as an outsider, it feels like it was really fun for a while, but it hasn't let any amazing new businesses for Facebook. Correct me if I'm wrong. I'm curious what that experience was like, what you took away from it, how it went, what you think about when you look back at that part of your journey.

Noam Lovinsky (00:39:28):
I was one of the few folks that kind of joined that team early and help build that team. How it ended up and how it closed down, I am not familiar with because I wasn't there. But I think in terms of was it a success or not because it didn't build the next Instagram I think is a little bit of the wrong bar to set for things like that. To some extent, it's like, "Did the group win the lottery or not? And let's judge there. Let's judge their success." Obviously I'm not saying that discovering something like Instagram is just winning the lottery, but you get what I mean in terms of the rarity of those sorts of discoveries and those sorts of products.

(00:40:12):
I think that that team was very realistic about what I would say would be the champagne level outcomes and/or more like the kind of beer, nice dinner kind of level outcomes.

Lenny (00:40:28):
Your wine.

Noam Lovinsky (00:40:29):
Yeah, the wine. Yeah, thank you. That's a better analogy. I think we built knowing those sorts of outcomes would also be very beneficial to the organization. So as an example, one of them is, at Facebook scale, doing things that don't scale or doing things that start out small was just a muscle that was really hard to come by, right? It's like any community product that you build, any kind of social where there's community density that's important early on, any product that you build that way, starting with a million users is a really hard way to do that. At places like Facebook and Google, it's like it's hard to run an experiment with a hundred people. It's not hard, it's impossible, right? And so this idea that you would have to get real small, that you would have to start very targeted, that you would have to start with things that clearly don't scale and don't have a chance of being big from the get-go is really, really hard in an organization like that.

(00:41:47):
And so creating that space for NPE to be able to do that, to be able to help remind the organization what are the mechanisms we need to be able to build and learn that way was very beneficial. Even simple things. At an organization of Facebook size, maybe experiences at an Airbnb, it is really hard for product managers, engineers and designers to talk directly with customers. It is basically impossible. You're almost always talking through some third party, some recruiting agency and getting reports and you're not always in the room. Imagine building a startup, like a product from day one and not being able to sit right next to your customer and being like, "Show me how you do this or show me how you do that.' It's incredibly hard. You're looking for such faint signal.

(00:42:48):
The idea that you would try to get it through layers of indirection and games of telephone is crazy, but at that scale, that's what you have to do because there's all of these legal concerns and many other realistic concerns about what you can say to who and who you can talk to and what you can tell them about what you're doing and all of these things. So creating an environment where those sorts of constraints were lifted and were different was very beneficial, I think, to the organization and started to shed a light on some of the things that were broken that make it hard to build 0 to 1 in those sorts of environments.

(00:43:31):
I also think it was a really fantastic recruiting tool. It did build a really great group of folks, many of which have left to go start interesting companies. But I guess what I'm trying to say is I think when you're an organizational leader, and Schrep was the org leader that was supporting NP at the time and he's fantastic and really did a good job of firewalling that team, I think you're looking at a set of objectives and a number of ways that you might help the company and the organization. Even if you set that light on the hill to be like, "Go find the next Instagram," many of the things that you would do along the way to find the next Instagram end up being very beneficial to the broader organization. We saw a lot of that in PE.

Lenny (00:44:28):
That's a really interesting perspective. There's a lot of other goals with something like this, it's not just find the next massive business. It's the way I think what I'm getting from this is shine almost a mirror on the organization, like, "Here's the things we can't do with the regular business and we have to do something. We have to set this up in order to try something totally new and radical recruiting tool" I think is interesting.

(00:44:49):
There's actually a team at Airbnb, the way I described it was, I don't know how many people know about Burning Man and how it works, but there's this trash fence around the side that catches all the trash so it doesn't go into the desert. And I feel like there's teams sometimes that are the trash fence of the company.

Noam Lovinsky (00:45:04):
That's funny, yeah.

Lenny (00:45:04):
Where someone's about to leave and they're like, "No, go work on this coal stuff over here in the fringe," which is really interesting. But just instill within the company and maybe help with that. Just keep people that are awesome at Meta. [inaudible 00:45:16].

Noam Lovinsky (00:45:16):
Yeah. You're right that the team didn't discover the next Instagram. For what it's worth, things like Threads and ideas like Threads were in that team all of the time. I think that if that team caught the wave of generative AI and all of the opportunities and new technologies there, I think things could have also... Because those are certain moments where you having small, really motivated, dedicated teams that aren't thinking about anything mainline can lead to faster discoveries, I think that can also help. But there were a number of things that basically ended up becoming features in other products and they were just easier, faster ways of validating and building them because you didn't have the constraints of the mainline product development organization, right?

Lenny (00:46:07):
For someone that is thinking about trying to create a startup within a startup, something a lot of big companies are trying to do, is there a piece of advice or two that you'd share for helping this be effective? Maybe one is just the goal may not be build the next big business. There's these sub goals also. What comes to mind?

Noam Lovinsky (00:46:26):
God, there's so many. Schrep did a really fantastic job of removing a lot of these constraints. So one is I would say think really hard about the incentive system. Smart, good people, even if they're not trying to, they end up kind of gaming things towards the incentive system. And so think long and hard about that. So for instance, if you're a large organization and you do some performance management process like twice a year and that's how you're going to evaluate and incentivize people in your 0 to 1 incubator, you've already killed it. It's the wrong incentive, it's the wrong timeframe. It creates adverse selection, problems for the sort of people that you bring in. And so it's hard in an existing organization to say, "We're going to take all these company processes around even how we level people and pay them and motivate them. And we're going to throw them out the window for this group."

(00:47:27):
How you build the infrastructure you use, this is something that the NP team did really well. Everyone got to do their own thing from an infrastructure perspective. Just do what is best for the problem you're trying to solve in this moment, knowing that you're likely going to throw away a lot of this code anyway. Being able to do that in an organization like Facebook or Google, if you ask anyone that works on those things, is really hard. It takes someone like a Schrep to be like, "Nope, they're going to get to do this. Sorry." And so I think that's really helpful.

(00:48:01):
For what it's worth, one of the organizations that we talked to that I felt like was doing this in one of the best ways was Nike. Nike has this incubation lab. It's a completely different operating model. They recruit a completely different type of person, very different incentive system. And essentially, where they end up plugging them into Nike is that when they have something into the distribution marketing kind of growth arms of Nike. But for the product discovery process, they're doing their whole different thing. Once they find some fit, then kind of Nike comes in and goes, "Boom. I'm going to help you explode your fit." But I think that the number one thing I would think about would be the incentive system and the adverse selection that that can cause.

Lenny (00:48:52):
To me, the most important element of the incentive system, and maybe I'm reading between the lines, is you're basically competing against them starting their own thing. And having upside if things go super well feels really important versus, "I'm just going to get a cool salary at Meta and work on this thing." That doesn't lead to the same experience as a startup where everything's on the line.

Noam Lovinsky (00:49:10):
Yeah. And also what time horizons, right? When you're starting a company, you're not thinking like, "In the next six months, I'm going to get a promo and I'm going to get a good rating and things are going to go well." You're thinking on a different, excuse me, time horizon, and you're thinking about an outsized impact or an outsized incentive. And so I would think about that if you're starting things internally as well.

Lenny (00:49:34):
Awesome. Okay. Let's move to the final bucket, Grammarly, which is where you're at now. The way I'm thinking about it is this kind of like a one, two rocket ship or I don't know, 10. It's further along than one, but that's where you're at now. To me, Grammarly is interesting because it's one of the very few successful B2C subscription businesses. There's almost none. There's Duolingo, Grammarly. And I know you're doing B2B also, but there's so few. There's so many dead bodies trying to build a business on top of consumer subscription. And so I'm just curious. What the current state of Grammarly? How are things going? What do you think has been the key to it being successful all this time and continuing to grow? And what lessons have you learned? I know you just joined relatively recently, but anything you've taken away from that journey so far?

Noam Lovinsky (00:50:26):
We don't talk about it often, but Grammarly is a much bigger company from a revenue perspective than I think people realize. The company has been around for 15 years and was profitable from day one, and continues to be quite profitable. So it's a very, very healthy business that is much larger than folks might realize. And that is actually quite intentional because the company was trying not to be noticed for a long time, very intentionally. The fact that you would have grammar and spell checking in Google Docs or grammar and spell checking in Word. People would often write off the company that like, "How is that a business? How is that a feature? These products already have it." And that was very convenient for Grammarly because they could kind of navigate between these giants in tech and grow a very phenomenal business on this use case that people had written off.

(00:51:30):
Now, come the advent of LMS, it's no longer a use case that people are writing off and sort of the dream of the founders that machines can assist us in communication in this way that they've had for 15 years, I feel like now the whole industry is like, "Well, this is obviously how we're going to communicate and machines are going to do all these things for us." And Grammarly is now sort of in the center of that hurricane. And again, I think it's a similar thing where it's like, "Well, there's ChatGPT. There's Microsoft Copilot. How is Grammarly going to have a chats?" But yet things still seem like there's the future. The future is bright.

(00:52:14):
And so to your question, I think what has made it work, I've only been here for 10 months so please kind of take this with a grain of salt, but my instinct is that people really love Grammarly because of how it works and where it works. And what I mean by how it works is Grammarly is one of the few products where you just install it and it makes you better. You don't have to configure it, you don't have to manipulate it, you don't have to change anything about what you're doing. You carry on and across all of your applications, across all of your tabs, you'll start getting pushed assistance to you in the right moment. You could ignore it if you want, no big deal, but it takes a very, very small amount of effort to tap on one of those things, get some value and keep going.

(00:53:04):
I think that a product that is that easy to use, that easy to extract value from, but then also that prevalent, how many different text boxes do you write in a given day? I mean, it is not less than 10, it is tens or potentially hundreds, right? And so it is everywhere and it is very, very low effort to get real value from it. And then the where we work is what I said, you don't have to change anything about your workflow. Grammarly meets you where you are and you get value from it. Doing that really well at this level of quality for a user base of this scale, essentially it's like a huge AI achievement masquerading as a little UX innovation, right? But that experience, that UX that sort of brings AI to the masses has obviously served Grammarly really well. I think those are some of the strengths that we're going to continue to lean on to now provide a very different type of assistance and value that we can because of where the technology has moved.

Lenny (00:54:21):
The other thing I've heard a lot about Grammarly, and Yuri was on the podcast and who led growth for a long time at Grammarly, is just how scrappy the business has been and the founders have been from the beginning, the fact that they've been profitable from the beginning. That feels like one of the threads through all of the successful consumer subscription companies, is super scrappy, not raising money for a long time. Is there anything there that you found to be really interesting or helpful for other folks that are maybe building the space?

Noam Lovinsky (00:54:46):
When you're a team that kind of starts out of Ukraine and you're not thinking that there's any chance that you're going to raise money and why would you do that, I mean it really... Back to our previous conversation of what happens when growth goes negative, it really forces you to focus on the important things. And so, like many of the early engineers who are still here because the company has done so well over the years, they think in like, "How is this work going to translate into revenue?" They think about the impact on the business from even very deep technical work that they're doing because I think they were brought up in this culture where the business doesn't really invest ahead of its profitability because it was a bootstrap business from day one. So that enforces everyone to think about their projects and their prioritization and how is what they're doing over the next two months going to actually turn into more revenue and keep the company growing and sustaining. So I think that culture is prevalent and help Grammarly get to where it is.

(00:56:00):
Now, I just want to be really honest that in moments that we're in like today, that can also be detrimental because the business gets to a certain size, you start getting to law of large numbers. You need to start thinking about are there other products? Are there other use cases? Are there other channels of growth? How do you invest ahead of some of that growth and start to diversify? Because at the scale and size that we are and aspire to be, we're going to have to do many more things and service many more different types of customers. And as you mentioned, we're going to have to pull off the motion of B2C to B, kind of get that product-led sales motion going. So all of those things are happening. And thankfully the business is as strong as it is where we can invest ahead now in those things while still maintaining profitability and a really strong business.

Lenny (00:56:57):
That's amazing that they're still team members and maybe I think you said engineers from the beginning, 12 years later. I think that says a lot about the business. And before we started recording, they're based in Ukraine and you were saying that they're going to Zooms, there's bombs going off, they have to go into bomb shelters and then jump on a meeting. It's incredible that team continues to operate and the business continues to do this well in spite of all that.

Noam Lovinsky (00:57:22):
Yeah, the team in Ukraine at Grammarly is... I mean, it's something else. It's a really fantastic team. When you speak to many of them, I think actually the work provides sometimes a very useful distraction, but they obviously feel a lot of pride in the business. They built a lot of this business. There aren't yet many businesses of this size that kind of come from Ukraine. I think that that team is incredible and continues to deliver a ton of impact to the company even in the circumstances that they're in. I know for the founders, a lot of why they want Grammarly to succeed and be the generational company that it can be is for Ukraine, and especially in this moment and it's awesome to see how that motivates them and 15 years on the same project is not nothing. That's some serious resilience. And so I think even in moments like that, using them as a way to motivate and strive for something greater I think says a lot about the founders and the team in Ukraine.

Lenny (00:58:40):
Absolutely. Hopefully there's a happy resolution soon there. I don't know if you know this, I was actually born in Ukraine.

Noam Lovinsky (00:58:47):
Oh wow.

Lenny (00:58:48):
I know Odessa.

Noam Lovinsky (00:58:49):
Oh, nice.

Lenny (00:58:49):
I don't want to talk about that much, but it's true. And I just realized we both have skys in our last name. Lovinsky and Rachitsky.

Noam Lovinsky (00:58:56):
So for what it's worth, my dad was born in Ukraine. He is from Kiev. My mom was from Lithuania, so yeah, I also have some Ukrainian background here.

Lenny (00:59:05):
All right, so Ukrainian episode.

Noam Lovinsky (00:59:07):
Yes.

Lenny (00:59:08):
Let me zoom out a little bit and get to the final couple questions. So thinking about your career broadly, I'm just curious if there's any general advice you share with people to help them have a more successful career. Anything that just generally you find is really important to do well or mistakes they make. And this is a big broad question, but anything come to mind of like, "Here's something you should really try to do more of or less of?"

Noam Lovinsky (00:59:37):
Look, when you're thinking about career opportunities and what job to take, it's really, really hard to sniff out really well in a high degree of certainty like success. I think that having a good nose for people and the sort of people that you can be successful with is something that you can develop. What I found is I always try to prioritize putting myself in positions that are going to cause a lot of growth and learning. And growth and learning can be very painful. And you kind of got to be okay with that and go into that because on the other side of that pain I think is the promised land.

(01:00:21):
And that's just served me really well, is I can't necessarily predict with high degree of certainty that this thing's going to hit, but I can get a sense of the people around me and I certainly can find situations that are going to stretch me, that are going to force me to do things that I haven't done where I'm going to grow and learn significantly. And over sort of the arc of my career, I feel like that's served me well. So that's usually what I tell people, is focus on on that if you can.

Lenny (01:00:53):
I love that advice. I've used this quote a number of times on this podcast, but something I always come back to is this line, "The cave you fear contains the treasure you seek." I'm curious if there's something you have found about when the pain is too much, that you shouldn't pursue that. A lot of people get into these places where their mental health gets hit, their physical health is hit, they're just doing work they should not, it's too much. Is there anything there that you find it's just like, "Okay, maybe this is too much of discomfort"?

Noam Lovinsky (01:01:24):
I mean, I think about a couple of things. I think in any situation you should be able to lean on one or two things that you're really strong at. That can be the foundation that keeps you going while you learn the other things. So just be wary of situations that are too net new.

(01:01:44):
There should be one or two important things as part of that job going into where you're like, "I got this. I know how to do this portion of it." So as an example, if you've never inherited a very large team and you work through how that works, but the product area that you're working on is one you're very familiar with what's necessary to be good in that product, whether it's really good sense of design or really good sense of analytical thinking, recommendation systems, what have you, there should be a couple of those things where you're like, "I got this. These things are going to be a stretch, but these things, I feel like I've got a handle on how to do this. I can always get better, but I feel like they're in my wheelhouse." And I think that tends to allow you to balance the pain with the areas that you already know and manage through in a more balanced and healthy way.

Lenny (01:02:48):
It reminds me of that chart I think from flow of you want it to be challenging but not too challenging, and that's where you end up being most successful. Is there anything else, Noam, you want to share or leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Noam Lovinsky (01:03:05):
Yeah, I just think that maybe going back to where we first started, Lenny, work on the things that make you happy, that fill you up. Life is short. We're all very lucky to be in this moment. There's no reason to spend time on things that don't give you energy. There's so much to do out there. I think that's the main thing I would focus on.

Lenny (01:03:29):
Amazing. And even though there will be things that you have to do, I think it's important to try to find as much of that as you can because not everyone can just like, "Nah, I'm not going to do this work thing. I'm just going to go on a walk." But I think that's such an important point. And we've talked about this actually a bunch on recent podcasts of just doing this energy audit where you pay attention to what gives you energy and what doesn't and try to do more and more [inaudible 01:03:54]-

Noam Lovinsky (01:03:53):
Totally.

Lenny (01:03:55):
... willing to do that again. With that, we reached a very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Noam Lovinsky (01:03:59):
Yeah, I'm ready.

Lenny (01:04:00):
First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Noam Lovinsky (01:04:06):
I'm going to cheat on this one and I'm only going to give you one. I'm only going to give you one because I don't want to cloud with any other. I recommend Build by Tony Fidel. Other than it being a good book, one of the main reasons I recommend it is that my wife wrote it. So she wrote it together with Tony. And I got to see that experience. She's a fantastic writer and Tony has a lot to learn from, so I recommend that book. I think that the part of it that was particularly inspiring to me to hear even more of the details that are in the book is just how many times he met failure before he made discoveries that are now driving so many of the things that we do. It's just a good reminder to keep at it and do the thing that really gives you that energy because eventually you can make that incredible discovery.

Lenny (01:05:00):
Next question, do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Noam Lovinsky (01:05:06):
I really like For All Mankind, if you've seen that on Apple TV. And then I just finished the last season of Fargo. Every single season of that series I think is fantastic.

Lenny (01:05:19):
Amazing. For All Mankind though, last season, not as amazing a consensus that I agree with, but worth watching.

(01:05:26):
Next question. Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates?

Noam Lovinsky (01:05:32):
I generally like interview questions that allow us to kind of do some work together, so I'm a little bit less on the behavioral "tell me about a time when" sort of stuff and more on the "Let's work a product problem together." It could be anything from like, "Let's design an alarm clock for children." Or lately I've been using one. "Given where technology is at, if we were to rebuild email, how might we do that?" I just feel like getting into it and getting into the details and really watching each other exercise our craft I think is really important. I have a whole podcast one time, if you're ready, about how most people don't know how to do leadership recruiting. And I feel like as I've advanced in my career, the interviews for some reason get easier and actually I can evaluate less about who I am as a product leader and whatnot. But yeah, those are the sorts of interview questions that I typically like.

Lenny (01:06:30):
Amazing. Is there favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Noam Lovinsky (01:06:36):
It's not recent, but I was a very early user of Arc and I really love Arc.

Lenny (01:06:43):
Your window right now is inside Arc. I also love Arc. We had Josh on the podcast.

Noam Lovinsky (01:06:48):
Nice.

Lenny (01:06:49):
Just watching the onboarding experience of Arc alone as a product person is worth your time.

Noam Lovinsky (01:06:53):
Totally. I love the animation when you download something. I mean just like all of the little things. And if Josh is listening, we would like to get Grammarly to work better with Arc, so please hit me up because I think there's a few things that the Arc browser is doing that make it hard to get Grammarly to work either on the client or in the browser.

Lenny (01:07:10):
Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often repeat to yourself, share with friends or family either in work or in life that you find useful?

Noam Lovinsky (01:07:18):
Gosh, for those that know me, this is going to share so much of my personality. I think the first thing that comes to mind is, we are meant to struggle. I just feel like through struggle is how we get better, how good things happen, how bonds form, and so I don't shy away from that kind of life experience.

Lenny (01:07:39):
I'm going to guess that you're Jewish. I'm also Jewish. That feels like a very Jewish thing to say. I love it.

Noam Lovinsky (01:07:43):
How would you guess, Lenny? It's literally written on my face. Yeah.

Lenny (01:07:48):
Perfect. Last question. As the chief product officer at Grammarly, I'm curious what word you most often misspell?

Noam Lovinsky (01:07:57):
The.

Lenny (01:08:00):
You do T-E-H?

Noam Lovinsky (01:08:01):
T-E-H. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Lenny (01:08:04):
Oh, man. Well, I find I misspell every word.

Noam Lovinsky (01:08:04):
Oh, that's funny.

Lenny (01:08:06):
I'm a terrible speller. I'm thankful for my... Oh, sorry. Go ahead.

Noam Lovinsky (01:08:09):
I was about to say I have a product for you that can help with your spelling if you want.

Lenny (01:08:13):
I am an active Grammarly user. Not only that. I use every product you've worked on, I realize.

Noam Lovinsky (01:08:17):
Oh, nice.

Lenny (01:08:17):
Obviously, Meta and mostly Instagram of the Meta products. And obviously Grammarly now and YouTube. I have a YouTube channel. Check it out. Subscribe and follow. And Thumbtack. My wife is a big Thumbtack user. We found many pros on Thumbtack from all kinds of parts of the world.

(01:08:35):
Noam, thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and how can listeners be useful to you?

Noam Lovinsky (01:08:42):
Yeah. I'm pretty much @noaml everywhere online, so Twitter is probably the easiest. My DMs are open. And then how people can be useful to me is please use Grammarly, provide any feedback that you might have. And honestly, if I can be helpful in almost any way, feel free to reach out. I often will take those conversations and build those connections, and that is always very helpful for me as well.

Lenny (01:09:05):
No, thank you again so much for being here.

Noam Lovinsky (01:09:08):
Of course. Have a good one, Lenny.

Lenny (01:09:09):
Bye everyone.

Noam Lovinsky (01:09:10):
Bye.

Lenny (01:09:12):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Oji Udezue (00:00:00):
Products who try to be viral just for what I call synthetic virality that fail. Because in the end, if you're synthetically viral and people get to the product and it sucks, that's it. Slack wasn't even viral, there was no synthetic virality. Slack couldn't even connect to organizations for the longest time. You could be working on the third floor, and someone using Slack on the fourth floor and you would have no clue, there's no way to share it with them. But what happens when you went to lunch? People are like, "We got Slack and this is amazing." And people on the third floor are like, "Holy shit, when can we get it?" Boom, boom, boom. This is the bedrock of virality. Build a great product that solves a sharp problem.

Lenny (00:00:37):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard-won experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Oji Udezue. Oji has helped build and grow products at Microsoft. He worked on Windows, outlook, Hotmail and inner Explorer, at Atlassian where he was head of product for all their communication tools, at Calendly, where he was chief product officer, at Twitter where he was head of product for creation and conversation. He's currently chief product officer at Typeform, which I am a happy customer of. Oji has one of the broadest and most interesting careers in product, and he's also one of the most thoughtful humans I've met. In our conversation, Oji shares some of his favorite product frameworks and also why you should be really careful applying frameworks at your company. We dig into what he's learned from Calendly and Atlassian and a Typeform on how to do product led growth successfully, and also how to get really sharp with your ICP or ideal customer profile.

(00:01:31):
Also, how to increase your products virality and a concept called forest time, which I love. And even his favorite Nigerian food, which I am currently on the hunt for. With that, I bring you Oji Udezue after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:01:44):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes the day-to-day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates, and you're spending your days basically putting out fires. A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and road mapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian. With Jira Product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place and prioritize confidently, finally replacing those endless spreadsheets.

(00:02:20):
Create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds. And it's all built on Jira where your engineering teams already working, so true collaboration is finally possible. Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers, sales, support, leadership, even Greg from finance. Anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free, no catch. And it's only $10 a month for you. Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over. Rediscover what's possible with Jira Product Discovery. Try for free at atlassian.com/lenny, that's atlassian.com/lenny.

(00:03:01):
Oji, Thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Oji Udezue (00:03:12):
Thank you, Lenny. It's a pleasure to be here.

Lenny (00:03:14):
It's my pleasure. You've been a PM and a product leader in so many amazing and also just very different companies, all with very different approaches to product and growth. And I think you have this very rare broad perspective on what works in product and growth across a lot of different ways of doing it. And so I have a bunch of questions for you. I hope you came ready for that.

Oji Udezue (00:03:34):
I am ready.

Lenny (00:03:35):
Okay.

Oji Udezue (00:03:36):
Yes, sir.

Lenny (00:03:37):
I love it. Okay, so I want to start with frameworks. You've written and shared a bunch of really interesting frameworks for how to think about product and growth, and so I just want to dig into a couple of them. And one of them is around how to find big B2B SaaS ideas and it's around finding the right workflow. Could you just share this framework and also just how founders and also investors can use this idea to find big ideas?

Oji Udezue (00:04:01):
Thank you. So I think you're referring to where do you fish to find a unicorn.

Lenny (00:04:05):
That's it.

Oji Udezue (00:04:06):
And the thing behind that is people can find that on Substack and the Medium, my writings. But the premise is that there's a lot of risk in building startups, and the last decade of product management and startups has really focused on the method of building software and companies. We talk about the lean approach, we talk about fail fast, [inaudible 00:04:28] and so on and so forth. And I think that that was a necessary phase for us because a lot of innovation was just the ideas of founders unvalidated by customers, and we needed this inflection point in our discipline. People need to understand though that customer science is not the solution to everything otherwise OpenAI will never have done anything. It's also innovation. And so the problem space and the solutions to the problems space is still a big driver of success in building software companies.

(00:05:03):
What problem are you really solving? And if you believe that the problem space is key, so what problems will predict success? In B2B SaaS especially, which is much easier to circumscribe is where I start to think about, look, how do you tell from the beginning? Because an investor as well as an operator. Now to segment this space, I think of two dimensions. One is how many departments in the company does the workflow you're trying to solve apply to? Is it just a few or is it all of them? And the second is how intense or how frequent is the workflow executed? Is it daily? Is it weekly? Is it three times a week? And so on and so forth. Now if you draw a nice quadrant of these two things, then you can start to have some predictive power. Things that are useful in every department I call every one workflows, like things like collaboration, like Slack, email, calendaring, workflows, social knowledge and Notion and so on and so forth.

(00:06:04):
And then things that apply to single departments, I call niche and that's what I call niche. And then the intensity is about frequency. A month is not infrequent, daily is super frequent. If you divide the market or the enterprise into frequency and into how broad the workflow is, you can actually have predictive power. And what I found by looking at the biggest company is public and private in each quadrant was that every one frequent workflows intuitively are the most profitable to work on, but also the hardest to get into because they're dominated by Microsoft and Google and very, very large companies. For example, one of my friends is the CEO of Coda. And so this is interesting, because he's in that space, for him to think about.

(00:06:58):
And then the place where B2B SaaS really thrives is niche workflows that are highly frequent. High ni is what I call it, high frequency niche. And then there are the other two quadrants that are a bit more challenging. And then you have to figure out how to navigate your way into one of the other two. If you are in one of the top two quadrants, high ni and high everyone and you solve a really important problem, workflow problem, you can probably turn into a billion-dollar company. If you do the other two, there's some challenges that you have to go through. And the framework talks about how you should navigate those places into success. And I think it's very important because if this is true, and by the way, like I said, I did some validation on it, founders can start to, before they invest years, start to think about what probability of success is. And if you're an investor like me or VC, you can start to think about how you deploy your money.

Lenny (00:07:57):
What are examples of companies in each of those quadrants? If you can frame this and I don't know if you have this in your head already.

Oji Udezue (00:08:03):
High frequency everyone workflows tend to be things that are done by the doorman to the CEO. So it's email, it's collaboration, it is writing, it is math, all the basic things. At Atlassian, we spend a lot of time thinking about this. So Word, we've had word processing forever in the workspace. Things like Notion and Confluence are huge as sort of evolution of that, Slack, email. Companies in that space, Google, Microsoft, Atlassian, et cetera. And the high ni, which is high frequency niche, you have things like Jira, you have things like tools for recruiters, you have martech, you have sales tech.

(00:08:49):
And we know the companies behind them, Atlassian, Salesforce, so on and so forth. And then in the low frequency everyone, you have things like maybe form tools. And actually, they're not that many of them, low frequency everyone or even expense. Actually, the best expensing. Not everyone does it all the time, but everyone essentially has to do some of it, mostly, at least a lot of people. And then there's a low frequency niche, which is particular department. So planning, which is done by FPNA, but done infrequently, things like that.

Lenny (00:09:30):
How frequent is frequent in your experience? Does it have to be once a week at least? What do you think is that minimum bar?

Oji Udezue (00:09:39):
Frequent is every day really or multiple times a week. Infrequent starts to be like two times a week, once a month. And of course there's a big interregnum in the middle of that.

Lenny (00:09:51):
It's interesting that there are examples of companies that succeeded in those lower quadrants of infrequent, say the expensing use case. Do you have a sense of what it takes to win there? Because I imagine most startups are in that area, and I imagine founders are like, what can we do to win still?

Oji Udezue (00:10:05):
Well, this isn't a static framework in the sense that companies are not destined to be one of these things. The essence of strategy is to navigate from the curve of travel is essentially go from the lower to the higher. Atlassian is trying to go from high niche to high everyone with Confluence and with all the tools that they have. People below are trying to get into the high frequency niche by focusing on their core customer. So what it looks like in say low frequency everyone workflows, something like that is, well, if some people are using it infrequently, but they must use it, well that's a good thing. But then maybe you provide a module that is used by the finance department every day, and so suddenly you're moving into the high frequency everyone workflow. So it's about finding a part of the organization that considers this mission-critical and then solving their problems beyond the problems for everyone for example, in that quadrant.

Lenny (00:11:08):
Is there an example that comes to mind of either at Calendly or Typeform or Atlassian where you pushed it further up the frequency direction or the everyone direction?

Oji Udezue (00:11:17):
For example, at Typeform, now this is real for me, Typeform technically is low frequency niche or low frequency everyone, depending on how easy it is to use and how it surrounds the customer. And one of the things that I'm trying to do as part of product strategy is to move it into high frequency niche, high ni, which is a very productive place to be. So for marketers, for salespeople, I want to make sure that they think of us first. And because we are particularly good at customer facing interactions, if they think that we are the way to win new business and to make money, then a portion of our audience, not every single one of them will consider us high ni. And I think expanding that foothold is the way to navigate a business like that. You can see that with Qualtrics, you can see that with SurveyMonkey. Lots of companies are thinking about how to further unbundle that market for a very, very specific kind of customer. And that is what they're trying to do. They're trying to hit the high ni, even for that more generic workflow.

Lenny (00:12:27):
That's an awesome example. You also have this framework that I think you call the zone of benefit, which is around how much better does your solution have to be than the status quo? A lot of people are like, "Hey, look at this product, it's better than what you have now." And usually people are like, "Ah, whatever. It's good enough." And you've had some insights on just how much better it needs to be for people to care. Can you share that?

Oji Udezue (00:12:45):
Honestly, the reason I like being a product manager is on any given day, I'm drawing from anthropology, sociology, behavioral economics, leadership, communication skills. I'm trained, I have a master's in engineering, so I'm an engineer as well. I've done marketing and sales, so really pulling from so many things. And the reason I talk about the zone of benefit is ultimately what we're trying to do is impedance match technology to humans. That's it. If you really think about it, that's one essence of what we're trying to do. So the zone of benefit works as a framework because people will not pay for things that don't either really shrink the workflow that they're doing or doesn't give them superpower. So the same amount of time, but twice as much output. But the most important thing is that it has to be noticeable.

(00:13:39):
If you do something 20% better, often people just around you, just as a human, people don't notice. And so for a product to make a difference, it has to be at least two, three more X for people to say, "You know what? This is offering enough value for me to maybe make a switch in cost," and so on and so forth. And it really comes down to look, economic theory tells us that people work for leisure, they work enough to afford their leisure. It's sort of broad, and I know some people don't necessarily do that. Especially in the tech industry, people just love to work. But that is really it, when you think about eight billion people on the planet. And there's a lot of benefit really hones in on the fact that if you're going to help me work less, make about the same amount of money, then for me to notice you, you have to accelerate me by three times for me to care.

Lenny (00:14:36):
Okay, awesome. So three times. So the idea there is you should feel like this is three times more productive in the thing that I'm trying to do or saves me three times, I don't know, I do it three times faster.

Oji Udezue (00:14:44):
Yeah, that's when people actually feel it and they feel it enough where they part with money.

Lenny (00:14:49):
Awesome. And I think what's cool about this is it helps you identify the ICP for your product if you're working a startup or even a new product within an existing product to figure out who exactly is going to most benefit from this. Is that part of this?

Oji Udezue (00:15:02):
Yes, yes. Your best customers aren't price sensitive for what you're shooting for because they get it. They fundamentally understand it. So yes, when you're shooting for ICPs, now every startup has marketing problems getting an audience problem. But once you start getting a decent audience, over 100 people or more, you should start to notice the people who are like, "You know what? This, I really care about this." And that starts to tell you a little bit about who's your target audience.

Lenny (00:15:33):
Would you be up for sharing the ICP of some of the companies you worked at? Just to give people a sense of what would be a good ICP.

Oji Udezue (00:15:40):
I think for Atlassian, it's really kind of obvious. It's developers mostly. But it's tech teams writ large because the fundamental of an R and D team is building stuff. And Jira helps the engineers who actually build stuff to track what they do and to give visibility to it so that they can be valuable to the organization. So that is incontroversial. So the ICP is really clear and have been clear for Atlassian for a very long time. Calendly is this weird company where people don't see all the value. People think it's just casual scheduling. But really the people who care about scheduling the most, and I don't mean calendaring. Calendaring is very different from scheduling.

(00:16:25):
The people who care about scheduling the most are salespeople because it's the lifeblood of them earning money and marketers, because it's the lifeblood of them maybe learning about their customer. Recruiters, because it's the lifeblood of them attracting and scheduling the people that they need to do their job. So Calendly's ICPs were people who were scheduling with people who were not in the organization for some business reason. Typeform is marketers mostly because Typeform exists to make the web talkative, to make it more human. And with Typeform, you can brand that conversation and actually make it conversational because one question at a time, the beautiful design. And so marketers feel like we help their websites talk to each other. Product people think we help their web apps talk to people they care about, UX people feel the same way. So those are some, I think the interesting thing is Twitter.

Lenny (00:17:27):
I was going to ask what the ICP for Twitter might be, still.

Oji Udezue (00:17:33):
So Twitter is actually more fun in terms of ICP because first of all, I'll talk about the things that's not obvious about Twitter. 30% of Twitter's customer base were unseen, they were media organizations, people like the NFL, the NBA, HBO, who wanted their content to reach more people, to be in conversational spaces. And they were essentially business customers and not seen in the conversation pool, it's not obvious. But we interacted with them all the time and we rev shared ads for their videos, because we're making content all the time. And so Twitter was a way to extend the monetization of that content, that inventory that already had. But when you go to the consumer side of Twitter, who was the ICP?

(00:18:25):
Well, actually Twitter understood, and this is sort of reflected in what Elon Musk is doing these days, that he doesn't seem to understand. And if you ask anyone who was at Twitter, you'll see the understanding in their eyes and the fact that he doesn't understand, because Twitter's ICP is bifurcated. On one side, it is the most accomplished people in the world, the people who have something to say. This is why there's neuro Twitter, there's weather Twitter, there is cancer Twitter, and so on and so forth. In fact, if something breaks, some new innovation happens in the world, it probably breaks on Twitter before it breaks anywhere else, because these are people in informal communities following each other and sharing their results.

(00:19:10):
So basically there's this big circle of experts. We break down into celebrities, we break down into luminaries, leaders and so on and so forth. That's the ICP. Now how does Twitter work? These people attract the other 90% who listen to these people, but also they need to create their own informal communities around the things they're passionate about and have this mimetic relationship with the luminaries and the experts. And that is sort of the planet Twitter, experts on one side, humans who need to connect with the things they're passionate about, the people who are like them, that is the ICP of Twitter, the people who have something to say in those two categories.

Lenny (00:19:58):
Are you happy you're not working on Twitter anymore?

Oji Udezue (00:20:00):
I am ecstatic, I'm ecstatic. It seems like such a shitshow, no shade on anything or anyone purposely. But look, what's happening is evident. So I don't think I have much to say about that.

Lenny (00:20:18):
Yeah, what a wild ride over there. Zooming out on the frameworks question, when I asked you ahead of our chat about what frameworks you love and anything you think would be interesting to share, you had a really interesting response and so I'd love for you to just share your perspective on frameworks broadly.

Oji Udezue (00:20:34):
Yeah. Look, I'm two things simultaneously. One is actually, I like frameworks. The way that I try to express them is mental models because the essence of a framework and a mental model is that it is a shortcut. It packages some dense thinking into a way for you to approach a problem or to approach an opinion and so on and so forth. So I do collect them. But I think that what's important, I feel in product management, is to have the ability to understand the fundamentals or the empirical relationship that constructs a framework in the first place. In math, you would call it being able to derive the equation. And the reason that's important is because there's so much uncertainty in what we do. Product management isn't a science. In fact, programming isn't even a science really, because if it was, we'd treat it differently. So the art of building, say a software company that is profitable is not scientific.

(00:21:36):
There's a lot of uncertainty, a lot of unknowns, there's timing issues. So I guess while I love mental models, while I love frameworks, what I want people who listen to me and maybe listen to you to understand is you have to go deeper. Because as situations change, as an investor and advisor to startups, I advise differently if you are just starting, if you're in the middle, and if you're scaling. In the book that I'm writing on product, I actually make that distinction a lot in the book, which stage are you? Because then the thing that applies to you is different. If you understand the fundamentals, you'll be able to use frameworks in a much more productive way because you'll adapt it to your stage, you'll adapt it to the problem. And I think that's really important. I see lots of people using frameworks very blindly, and I think that's harmful to them and harmful to their businesses.

Lenny (00:22:31):
What a great segue to where I wanted to take us next, which is around the book that you're writing, which is my understanding is it's product management for product led growth. And I'm on your wait list to find out when it's out, and I saw that the other day you asked people for their advice on what to call the book. Do you have any favorites at this point of what you might title it?

Oji Udezue (00:22:50):
Well first of all, there are two things happening with the book. One is I believe PLG is, I have maybe a different definition of PLG, but I think the way that we are basically adapting products to the consumer or to the business professional and using the product itself to sell the value proposition is really key to transitioning from what we used to do 20 years ago to today. Basically, I think even enterprise companies will tend towards a consumer type product management over the next decade than the other way around, that's my bet. And so let's call that PLG, just writ large. And also I think product management is set for growth. So obviously that's good for you, Lenny, because everyone needs to know how to do this.

(00:23:39):
It's an integrative art within building software and software is seeding the world, the book, I want to get very practical. What matters about doing those two things well, and the best titles coming up are, my original title was Building Rocket Ships. So it's like how do you think through all the different things you need to build a really successful software company? Think about the practice, think about the business, meld those two things together. So a lot of people love that title. Well, there's a huge variation in submissions. So I think we're going to do that one more time and offer more options before we nail down the title of the book, so still TBD.

Lenny (00:24:22):
Cool, all right. I'm excited to see where you land. So let's just spend some time on PLG. I feel like this is your bread and butter as a product leader. You've worked at some of the most successful PLG companies and I think you have some of the most unique perspectives on what works and doesn't work. And I saw you shared a preview of what you're going to be sharing the book, and so there's a few things there that I thought were really interesting that I haven't seen other places when it comes to PLG. So I was just going to dig into it-

Oji Udezue (00:24:45):
Yay.

Lenny (00:24:49):
Absolutely. The first is this framing that you had for where to start and how to focus with your PLG problem. And you described it as starting with a sharp problem. Can you talk about what that means?

Oji Udezue (00:24:59):
Yeah, so I'm trying to connect dots. The sharp problem is a little bit of that whole quadrant framework, which is what problem are you going to work on? I think that problems have predictive power of success if you actually solve the problem. And this is different from, I have an idea, yeah. I think that a lot of innovation can come from inspiration, but the best inspiration comes from understanding customers and their problems. So my advice to founders is pick a problem that is materially felt by your customers, pain points that steal their time, their energy, their money, their focus, the inability to afford their leisure. If you can solve those kinds of problems, and look, I know that it's broad, because it requires insight. The best founders often are people who felt a problem, understand it, understand that it's really difficult, and understand that there may be like five, 10, 20 billion people who feel it and they don't want to solve that problem versus I feel a problem, but only 100,000 people care. In which case, maybe it's not that intense anyway, unless you can charge them thousands and thousands of dollars.

(00:26:22):
So pick those kinds of problems. If you have the narrative in your head that if you really solve this, people will pony up. That's what I ask people to find. Too many of us just have a sharp idea. Look, I've built a startup on a non-sharp problem, and I knew how it felt. Well, I also know working in companies that are solving sharp problems how it feels, it's a huge tailwind to do that. In fact, when you work on sharp problems, it's hard to fail because you can make mistakes and the customer's obsession will carry you, but if you work on something that doesn't have a sharp problem, mistakes can kill you because essentially you're having to pay a lot for marketing, you're having to pay a lot for word of mouth. People, when they get poor, they don't care about it, like recessions.

Lenny (00:27:15):
Coming back to something you mentioned earlier about just how much pain it needs to be for people to care or how much pain it needs to solve versus the status quo, I think is a really important element of this. I think most founders like, no, I need to solve a problem. But usually it's not painful enough or it's not solving it enough, given either an example of something that you've tried or you've seen of just like that was a sharpish problem but not sharp enough and people didn't care, either a company worked or a startup you advised of just like, okay, it wasn't sharp enough.

Oji Udezue (00:27:46):
I don't want to create enemies because I know a lot of founders. But here's one, here's one. I don't know if you remember during the pandemic, this venture studio by I think one of the ex founders of Evernote created mmhmm camera, remember that?

Lenny (00:28:04):
Oh yeah, absolutely. Yeah, great video.

Oji Udezue (00:28:07):
It was fun, but I don't think it was a sharp problem. It was fun, but yeah, it didn't change the world of your Zoom camera. It didn't change the world of your collaboration. And so I think that's one example of a non-sharp problem, for example, for most people.

Lenny (00:28:31):
What are signs that it's sharp enough, just like in your experience? I know you talked about it steals your time, energy, money focused. What are flags that this is sharp enough in your experience?

Oji Udezue (00:28:43):
I think there are two ways to think about it. If you are in the trenches as a founder, the easiest way to map out a sharp problem is draw the current approximate average workflow for your target customer, at least what you think is a target, and then draw the workflow after they've used your software and see how much shorter it is, yes or no. And then try to measure those lines. If you draw them as horizontal lines, try to measure those lines and see if it's much shorter. If it's 2X shorter, 3X shorter, so let's say pre-customer, that is the best way to hone in on it. Post customer, you should talk to the people who are most enthusiastic and derive their workflow and their workflow change and try to measure that. I think that's how you figure out if it's a sharp problem or not.

(00:29:37):
The other thing that we talk about in startup super early stage world is, I call it the whites of their eyes. When you take a problem and you share it with someone who it's going to affect their workflow, and I use the word workflow a ton because I don't use specs anymore or use cases, I think workflows are the unit of productivity. When you see people's eyes get big and they expose more whites to you, you're probably onto something. It's not enough, that's not a workflow thing, that's an excitement thing. But people often react that way when you're solving a really sharp problem for them. And then people spontaneously bring up money, it's like when can I pay? When can I... Those kinds of things give you an indication.

Lenny (00:30:23):
Two other versions of the showing more whites of your eyes, which I love. Two other versions of that I've heard is one is you see their pupils dilate and they're just like, "Whoa, I need this now." And then the other is someone described it as, you see this nod of as you're talking, they're just like, "Oh, I get it. I get this." And then they're like, "Okay, we need this in our company."

Oji Udezue (00:30:46):
I'm a little over those ones because sometimes it's just excitement and just noise. And so the things I said previously about workflow compression or capability inflation, I think those are more reliable, which is all about customer research and customer conversations. That's what I would focus on. Yeah, I'm saying all this from mistakes I've made, basically. So I feel like this is scar tissue, which is what I'm trying to pour into the book.

Lenny (00:31:18):
Speaking of talking to customers, another one of your big bullet points in the book is around continuous customer discovery, and I'm curious what you found to be successful in actually doing that. A lot of people talk about it when you keep talking to customers, get feedback constantly. What actually works in your experience?

Oji Udezue (00:31:34):
Yeah, I feel like all of park management is about discovery these days. Everyone talks about it, and I want to make a distinction. I think discovery is when you use customer conversations to understand a very specific thing that you want to optimize further workflow that you want to optimize further. And then you call the people who are most likely to be affected and you do use various research strategies to talk to them. There's a version of that also that is what I call continuous conversations, which is a Calendly and a Typeform, which we'll do more and more of. You should organize it so that your PMs, your designers, your engineering managers and your PMMs are constantly talking to customers by default. Meaning that customer conversations show up on their calendar every week automagically, without them getting involved. And then they're trained on how to have the conversation, because the death of customer discovery is friction. If you ask individuals to do customer discovery, they will not do customer discovery.

(00:32:49):
This is the thing that dies in an innovative company because it's very difficult to actually talk to the right customer, not talk to any customer, talk list of the right customer continuously. But there's a third thing that I like to talk about, which is customer listening. In fact, I'm going to talk about this at industry in October, the PM Conference. Customer listening is different. It's not really discovery. It is the scarfing up of customer signals that are happening constantly anyway. So people are talking on social, people are talking on app stores and G2 crowd. If you have a instrumented churn survey, people are talking. If you have NPS, people are not only giving you the scores where they're putting in the verbatims. If you have a bug report, which we had at Atlassian, people are filing bugs, developers love to file bugs, so of course we have that for that audience. And then if you go to Zendesk and customer support, people are either talking about one thing all the time or a range of things, and you can see the frequency distribution.

(00:34:01):
And of course in Salesforce, you have closed one. These are all things happening no matter what you do. Whether you're listening or not, you're getting these signals. One of the big, hairy, audacious goals of product management is being able to process these signals efficiently. We did it in a certain way at Calendly, which I drew a rig together through workflows and Slack, and then having individuals triage those things. And if you can do that hard and at industry, I'll talk a little bit about how to do it. It's not exactly discovery. It is what matters. Our job is to meld customer delight with business ambition. And it feels essential beyond discovery that you are listening and you're understanding what matters from a customer delight perspective. And I don't think many of us do this really well. I've tried to do it everywhere I've gone, Twitter, Atlassian, Calendly, now at Typeform. But it still feels like something that the industry can get better at.

Lenny (00:35:08):
This touches on advice that Teresa Torres teaches around continuous customer discovery. And she actually had a really good tactic, that I'll share here that stuck with me, about how to actually do this. So the way she recommends companies do this is have a little popup on your site asking visitors like we'd love to talk to you and get your feedback on our product. And it just links them to a Calendly to book a meeting, and that's how it shows up on the calendar.

Oji Udezue (00:35:30):
Yeah, that's what we did at Calendly. But I will say, so a couple of caveats, we did that in the community. We had community at calendly.com and we understood that that was a self-selected group. But it was still important to talk to them because they were still representative. And of course you should do it in a product. The challenge of that approach is always is it the right customer? And the pro/con of that is talking to one customer is useless, talking to 100 is super useful. And so the challenge is are you targeting the right person?

(00:36:09):
So some intelligence upfront and who to show it to and why you're showing it to them, so that they can come is interesting. Very particularly effective by the way for growth, because if people don't activate or churn, they don't want to talk to you. But if you can present that thing in their activation or conversion journey, they might actually talk to you. And so that's really key. So I 100% agree with Teresa, that's exactly what you should do for not even, I wouldn't even call it discoveries for listening, and some of it can be discovery. Yeah, I think that's exactly what you should do.

Lenny (00:36:45):
As you're talking I'm realizing I'm using most of the products you help build. I'm on Twitter a lot. I use Calendly a lot. I use Typeform as my default survey tool.

Oji Udezue (00:36:55):
I saw that, my team is really excited that you're using Typeform.

Lenny (00:36:59):
You've impacted my life in so many ways, Oji.

Oji Udezue (00:37:02):
I think you owe me money, Lenny-

Lenny (00:37:04):
What do you need? How much? Give me your Venmo QR code, it's on [inaudible 00:37:09].

(00:37:11):
You fell in love with building products for a reason, but sometimes the day-to-day reality is a little different than you imagined. Instead of dreaming up big ideas, talking to customers and crafting a strategy, you're drowning in spreadsheets and roadmap updates, and you're spending your days basically putting out fires. A better way is possible. Introducing Jira Product Discovery, the new prioritization and road mapping tool built for product teams by Atlassian. With Jira Product Discovery, you can gather all your product ideas and insights in one place and prioritize confidently, finally replacing those endless spreadsheets.

(00:37:47):
Create and share custom product roadmaps with any stakeholder in seconds. And it's all built on Jira, where your engineering team is already working, so true collaboration is finally possible. Great products are built by great teams, not just engineers, sales, support, leadership, even Greg from finance. Anyone that you want can contribute ideas, feedback, and insights in Jira Product Discovery for free, no catch. And it's only $10 a month for you. Say goodbye to your spreadsheets and the never ending alignment efforts. The old way of doing product management is over. Rediscover what's possible with Jira Product Discovery. Try for free at atlassian.com/lenny. That's atlassian.com/lenny.

(00:38:32):
Getting back on track. Another important part of the book that you're writing is around onboarding. And something that I talk a lot about on this podcast is just the power of onboarding and how impactful it's to retention and so much of the eventual success of your product and how customers use it. And so I'd love to hear just your advice on what you think is really important, I guess why onboarding is so important in success and PLG. And also just what tactics have you found to be really effective?

Oji Udezue (00:38:59):
Let me talk about a few fundamentals. Onboarding is a substitute for sales and all these account management teams for millions of customers. The task is how do you make it approximate a human and how friendly a human is and how approachable a human is? Because if you can do that, then you can process thousands and thousands of customers very quickly. Onboarding is an exercise in understanding the mindset of a buyer, of an evaluator. It's nothing more than that. Meaning that the province of understanding is social psychology, it's not really product, it's biopsychology. And guess who knows a lot about this stuff, it's people in the offline industry. The people who stock shelves, the people who provide inventory online and so on and so forth. They are extraordinarily good at this. So the reason I say this is to divert people who are [inaudible 00:40:00] to really find where to source their inspiration from for onboarding, first of all.

(00:40:06):
If you think about this as intentful in that way, which is people come not knowing anything about you and in a progressively developed confidence that you are the tool of choice, you then have to break it down into how does that journey go through a mind, the average mind anyway, and how do you assist each part? One is value proposition, understanding, one is trying to see if it's simple enough and provides enough value. One is kicking tires and one is making the choice that this is something I'm going to go forward with. How does your onboarding support hit all of these things? Now I think there are two parts of onboarding. One is mandatory, the setup, it has to be spare. I try not to make it more than three screens, but it's about how do you say what this does and provide the essential setup that your customer needs to be successful?

(00:41:05):
At Calendly, for example, we asked them about connecting their calendar and setting some defaults. Is it 9:00 to 5:00 or whatever that is? Those two things set up all the future success. And if we made it optional, more people would fail. So it's information and the essential setup, and it should be as short as possible. Then there's a whole other set of things that should be optional because they're not necessary for everyone to be successful, but they're beneficial if people are curious. And also, it can be what we call a random access, so people can get back to it any time they want, if they're feeling help. And so if you divide onboarding into those two things and then figure out what to put in one and what to put in the other, I think you can be quite successful. And this is just the tip of the iceberg that I get into in the book.

Lenny (00:41:56):
Are there any examples of really big onboarding wins, things that really helped with conversion or activation that come to mind?

Oji Udezue (00:42:01):
Well, I think keep it short is one big win. The fewer things, the better, that are essential, that everyone has to go through. It's unclear if all those clickthroughs go here, go here, and all those things work-

Lenny (00:42:16):
The wizards, yeah.

Oji Udezue (00:42:18):
Yeah. The wizards have had, in my experience, limited benefit. So much as just directing people to the one thing that they need to do post mandatory onboarding. Having examples, not 10, one or two of what good looks like is particularly powerful because it's mimetic. People see, oh, okay, this is exactly what I'm shooting for, is very powerful. In terms of trial and conversion, letting people understand and being very clear about where they are in the trial cycle, whether you want them to pay for it now or they need to pay for it later, after seven days. Having them understand that really clearly so they know where they are versus they feel like they're completely at sea, I think is very important for conversion.

(00:43:07):
I think there are a few things like that, but I also want to mention that it's different for every product. Depending on where you are in the quadrant and the amount of augmentation and problem solving and how sharp the problem is, you might want to adjust your approach. And this is the kind of thing that there's some fundamentals, but it's not necessarily this one size fits all. In fact, at Typeform, we're trying to maybe invent a new twist on freemium just because of some of the things we're seeing for our particular customers. And so yeah, these are for me, some new learning as well as I go through each different product.

Lenny (00:43:49):
Along these lines of onboarding activation and getting a user activated is really important. And I'm curious, do you have an example of what an activation milestone was at Calendly or Twitter or a Typeform? Just to give people a sense of like here's a good example of an activated user milestone.

Oji Udezue (00:44:03):
I think this goes back to people, the Pendos and the Amplitudes of this world. You have to think through your aha journey. Like at Calendly and also at Typeform we have three thresholds of increasing activation. And we just try to make sure that people go through each one as many people as possible. And frankly, we try to figure the drop-off between the increasing definitions of activation. So at Calendly we want to make sure you've created your first meeting. But then if you've created five within a week, that's really much more powerful. At Typeform, it's really about have you published the form and have you gotten responses? And have you gone to look at what the responses mean in the insights page, for example.

(00:44:52):
At Twitter it is are you following anyone or are you being followed? Because that verb, follow, is the way you start to construct your informal community. Remember what I said is Twitter is for people who want informal community around a topic that is not... Facebook is about who do you know, Twitter is about who do you want to know? Who's passionate about what you're passionate about? And so if you haven't set up your follow graph at all, you're not going to really activate. It's not going to be compelling for you.

Lenny (00:45:23):
Awesome, those are great examples. It's funny hearing that Twitter activation milestone out of context sounds, so creepy. Have you followed anyone or is anyone following you?

Oji Udezue (00:45:31):
Yeah, because a lot of people go in and then they tweet into the void or they don't feel like they have a voice. But that's not the most important thing. Most important thing is are you getting content that you are interested in that makes you want to come back and see more of it and follow is a huge part of doing that.

Lenny (00:45:47):
Yeah. Just on the point of Twitter, I don't know if this goes anywhere, but it's crazy how it keeps going no matter how much destruction is happening all around, employees-

Oji Udezue (00:45:58):
Oh, you want me to talk about that? Because I want to talk about this.

Lenny (00:45:58):
Please, let's do it.

Oji Udezue (00:46:04):
So one of the things they, I don't want to say they, one of the things I learned early on is network effects.

Lenny (00:46:11):
Yeah.

Oji Udezue (00:46:12):
Network effects, let me define it. Network effects is when you create value for passive members by other people joining the network. So I am by myself, I have done nothing. I'm at home, chilling, but one person joins the network and immediately I gain benefit, okay. So think about Facebook. If there are eight billion people on Facebook, it means that all of a sudden I can reach everyone on the planet. And so the more people on Facebook, the more it's valuable to me regardless of my effort. That's network effect. If I'm into Word, word processor, Microsoft Word, and the more people who use that file format, it means that the more Word documents I can read.

(00:47:05):
And so I did nothing, so by increasing the people adoption of Word, I gain benefit. Network effect, that's what it is. So Twitter and then this is the mental model of critical mass, network effect is about critical mass. You hit a critical mass and sometimes that's not mathematically defined, and then you've hit network effect because people want to come because people are already there. So Twitter has hit critical mass and lots of your favorite social networks. Network effects is a feature by itself, and it's the most powerful feature. A good way to illustrate the power of network effects is Twitter did not die because Threads came about, that's the power of network effect. In fact, the last telegram was sent in 2016, over 100 years after it was invented because of network effects. It had to be manually closed down.

(00:48:03):
I believe Friendster is still alive, so we have to be really clear that it's really hard to kill a network effects business. Now how do you actually accomplish it if you were to accomplish it? Well, the revenue side of any social network is vulnerable to attack. So for example, if advertisers stop being on Twitter, for example, they're not gone because again, network effects affects them. They want to go where the eyeballs are. But if for some reason they disappeared, while the people will continue to come, the ability to have money to improve the network will disappear. And that is a negative spiral. What is very, very hard to kill business, it's hard to kill software that's reached network effect, although you can kill businesses that have reached network effect.

Lenny (00:48:56):
That's a really important and interesting insight. I think what's even especially interesting about Twitter is Elon and the team have removed every other benefit of Twitter, like the brand, gone, employees, 80% gone. Every part of it is being cut off, except for the network effects, and so it's a really cool case study. Dan Hockenmaier tweeted this, was a previous guest, of just like it's a good case study of what is just the power of just network effects.

Oji Udezue (00:49:19):
That's right. I did a really interesting course at Berkeley Business School, asked about technology companies and so on, and this is a perfect case study on network effect. The best I've ever seen. It is incredible.

Lenny (00:49:36):
Yeah, it's wild Threads isn't able to get there quickly, unlike what it felt like initially.

Oji Udezue (00:49:43):
Threads will prosper, I believe. And again, it'll just be another click for advertisers who understand the Facebook marketplace versus Twitter ad marketplace is much harder to access. And so I think the way Threads wins is the revenue spiral versus the pure activity spiral.

Lenny (00:50:02):
Interesting. Where essentially they find ways to, even with lower base, generate revenue, which drives advertisers, drives more investment.

Oji Udezue (00:50:10):
Correct, correct, correct.

Lenny (00:50:11):
Awesome. All right. That'll be fun story to watch. Kind of along those same lines, I want to chat about virality a little bit. You worked on some of those viral products out there in B2C, I guess Twitter is an example, but also in B2B, which is really rare and interesting. And I know there's no silver bullet for increasing virality, but everyone's always wondering, how do I increase the virality of my product? So I'm curious, anything you could share, any tactics that you've seen work to increase the virality, especially of a B2B product?

Oji Udezue (00:50:36):
Well, as is my style, I want people to understand what virality is in the first place because I think people have misconceptions about it. People think virality is some Hotmails tag at the bottom that says, we'll get a free account. Virality is really when the word of mouth of a product is high quality. That's really the essence of it. Let me rephrase that. It's when customers market your product. And that is incredibly powerful, but also that's incredibly actionable, if that makes sense. There are products who try to be viral just for what I call synthetic virality that fail. Because in the end, if you're synthetically viral and people get to the product and it sucks, that's it. That's the end. Even Hotmail, for example, people talk about the viral tag. I don't know, you know what I'm talking about? Because I-

Lenny (00:51:32):
Absolutely, at the bottom, yes [inaudible 00:51:34].

Oji Udezue (00:51:35):
Well remember, it wasn't just that. It was one of the first webmail things. And webmail was revolutionary because you didn't have to have a POP3 client and lose your email across multiple devices. It solved a lot of really good problems for customers at the time for email. And so when they arrived from the free account, it was like, holy crap, this is amazing. And so let's do that. Uber doesn't have any weird viral traps, but it compresses the workflow of getting a cab so much that it's viral, if that makes sense. In fact, it was this time where Austin kicked them out for and other apps came in and filled the void, and then it came back after the year and just crushed everybody. There was no campaign, it was just viral by itself. So that's what virality is. So then the question is how do you increase it?

(00:52:30):
Well look, fundamentally build a great product that solves a sharp problem and build it really well. If you do this, this is the bedrock of virality. If you don't do this, there's no viral tactic that will work in a sustained way. It will fizzle. But if you do this, you can lay on synthetic virality strategies for referral, strategies for coming back into the app and creating an account. Remember before Calendly, there was Acuity scheduling, there was other things. The difference was Calendly was so well-made, so simple for schedulers, so respectful of schedulers' time, not just the creator's time that the virality worked. It did not work for others who sucked. Xted AI and other places, they weren't that good. You have to be good to be viral.

Lenny (00:53:33):
That is such an important insight, that everyone looks at Calendly like of course you're sharing calendars with everyone, it's going to go viral. That's like what a cool trick. But your point is so interesting that there's previous versions of that, but the product itself wasn't great. The experience wasn't great. It was too complicated, it didn't work, and that's what made it so viral.

Oji Udezue (00:53:52):
Yeah, there may be several things I think affect virality. But I think that this is the nugget that people need to take away, that is the foundation of bedrock of all of them. Customer support actually affects virality. If you have fanatical customer support, people will love it. Viral tactics like the page that says, oh, get an account, and so on. All these signing documents, Calendly and so on and so forth. Network effects as in Calendly, you have these green dots. If you and a person have, Calendly tells you when you're free, all network effects, really high quality execution, synthetic virality all contribute to net virality. But the fundamental is exactly what we just discussed.

Lenny (00:54:38):
Just got to get it all right. No big deal.

Oji Udezue (00:54:42):
Build the best product possible, honestly, if you want to be viral. Slack wasn't even viral, there was no synthetic virality. Slack couldn't even connect to organizations for the longest time. Why? You could be working on the third floor and so on, using Slack on the fourth floor, and you would have no clue. There's no way to share it with them. But what happens when you went to lunch? People are like, "We got Slack and this is amazing." And people on the third floor are like, "Holy shit, when can we get it?" Boom, boom, boom. Great product first is virality.

Lenny (00:55:14):
Seth Godin has this phrase they always come back to, if you want to make your product remarkable, something people want to remark about, and that's basically the core of word of mouth.

Oji Udezue (00:55:23):
Yes, yes, yes.

Lenny (00:55:24):
I was watching a talk you did on this kind of topic and you had this great phrase that you sort of touched on, but I think it's so good, and I just want to make sure we highlight it, which is that virality is customer augmented marketing.

Oji Udezue (00:55:36):
Yeah, I think it is the thing that I started with first. It's when your marketing is essentially done by your customers because what it does, it affords you the ability to spend less on marketing. And you can either uplevel your marketing execution or save money that you can put in the product. Atlassian spends maybe like 10, 20 percentage points less on marketing than the equivalent competitors because it's viral and also because it's network effects at this point as well, say Jira. And so it's customer augmented marketing. Your customers are either forcing other people to adopt it or shaming them into adopting it or FOMOing them into adopting it. So yes, virality is essentially customer oriented marketing, which gives you options.

Lenny (00:56:28):
I love that phrase, I'm going to use it now. I have just a few more questions before we get to a very exciting lightning round, and these are kind of random two topics that I wanted to chat on. One is this concept that you call forest time. It's a post you wrote about the importance of forest time. Can you just describe what that is and why it's so important, and then also just how to do this?

Oji Udezue (00:56:49):
I operate, I'm an operator right now, meaning that I'm building things, I work for a company. But I also advise and invest, which is different. When I'm advising, I'm looking from above, from outside, I have a bird's eye view and I'm able to say, "You know what? This will work. This won't work. What have you done? Can I look at the results?" And then cycle the advice based on what you're seeing and what I'm seeing. When I'm operating, I'm building a team, I'm hiring, I'm managing all the things, Alina, shout out that hates sometimes. And that's what I'm doing. When you are operating, you have the tug of war. It is so intense that you don't have the attention to have a bird's eye view constantly.

(00:57:39):
And so forest time is the idea that you make time within your week, within your month to see the forest for the trees. Most of the time when you're operating, you're seeing the tree, which is the problem in front of you. But sometimes you need to see the forest, so you can figure out it as an alternate path, different from the one that you are currently on your campaign. And so it's time to elevate, to get some bird's eye view, to see the entire landscape and see the alternative paths through the current problems that you're escaping. And I think that it has to be very intentional. And intentionality there is, I have published a workflow, a document that helps you make that step to make that elevation.

(00:58:25):
Like what are the issues? What are alternative ways to solve this potentially that I'm not seeing? Et cetera. And what I try to do is I try to create that forest time for my executive team as well because it's not just me that suffers from this, it's most everybody. In fact, it's most PMs because PMs are so influential that the spoke of the wheel of product creation and product development that we often, it's a sine wave. You are discovering and shaping problems and then you are commanding and captaining execution. And it's endless and they're endless meetings. And so you need to create time for forest time, for elevation. If you don't, you'll become less effective over time. It's just attrition.

Lenny (00:59:14):
And then just to make it even more concrete for people, what are examples of forest time? Is it taking time off? Is it advising on the side? Is it-

Oji Udezue (00:59:20):
It is taking a day off at the end of a month, a full day or two days. And instead of just playing golf, although that's fine, it is doing a workflow, worksheet to survey the forest specifically. And sometimes managers are like, "Wait, you're giving people a day off when they should be working harder and harder?" And I think it's completely worth it. It's not about working harder, it's working smarter. It's about seeing more options than you see. And so I'm very happy to give that time to product managers, to product executives or design executives or engineering executives.

(01:00:01):
Because I think that if they do it properly, then we'll have better execution in the long run. Let's put it this way, in product development, we aim for maybe like 10% of the time and then we execute and build for the other side. It's not just, there's more stuff we do. If your aim is off, then you are spending one, $2 million incorrectly of people's time. And so forest time should improve your aim. That's the entire point, because your aim is a precursor to a huge amount of investment. And so I think it's well worth it.

Lenny (01:00:36):
I love this. So specifically what you do with your team is once a month, you give them a day to do this kind of worksheet that you put together?

Oji Udezue (01:00:45):
Yes.

Lenny (01:00:45):
And then that worksheet is in this post that you wrote, that you point to. Is that right?

Oji Udezue (01:00:49):
Correct, correct.

Lenny (01:00:50):
Amazing. Okay, great. This is very practical advice. I love it. Okay, one last question before a very exciting lightning round. You worked at Bridgewater Associates, which I didn't know until I started digging into your past. That sounds creepy. And Bridgewater Associates famous for what? Ray Dalio's hedge fund, author of Principals and all these other incredible books, and it's a very unique working environment. So I just wanted to ask about your experience there, specifically one of the craziest things there is just this thing called dots I think it's called, where people just call out mistakes that people make at the company and it's public. Is that how it actually was? Any memories of that?

Oji Udezue (01:01:27):
Yeah, yeah. I was a senior management, what's called an SMA, which is the management layer right under Ray's team. And we were the priests of the Church of Bridgewater. Bridgewater did things like record, this is public knowledge, I'm not saying anything-

Lenny (01:01:50):
Yeah, he writes about-

Oji Udezue (01:01:51):
... before every meeting. Eventually we created a dot collector, which allows you to rate people in real time. So I'm just having a conversation with you and before the meeting closes, in front of each other, I pull up my laptop and I rate you and rate the interaction. And in theory, the idea is that if you constantly rate people across hundreds of interactions, then you build a picture of them that is fairly accurate, statistically accurate, that will transcend maybe emotional relationship as wisdom of the crowd idea. So that's a theory. In practice, it is emotionally exhausting. And like you said, the little creepy, even the recording.

(01:02:38):
So I think there were things about Bridgewater that I understood intellectually in terms of the purpose that Ray had designed, but didn't quite work. It's like the way I think about this is the theory of the principles are really good. The practice and the execution can be quite off and not very human or not very empathetic. But I will say this, Bridgewater taught me things that I don't think any other organization in the world thought taught me. One example is Bridgewater thinks of people in three dimensions, their skills, their attributes, and their values. Most organizations think about people in terms of just their skills. But it makes sense that people have attributes and values, that people are timid, people are bold, people like to jump in, people like to stand back.

(01:03:38):
All these other things, we think about personality and proclivity. Bridgewater tries to establish and measure them and also tries to write job descriptions that say, this is the kind of attributes we're looking for, not just the skills we're looking for. And then of course values. Are you a thief or are you a principled? And so on and so forth. Now that idea of looking at talent or people in general, both in your professional life and in your personal life, is a huge addition to me as a professional from Bridgewater. So I'm saying that there were things I didn't enjoy about Bridgewater, but things that I learned that I've learned nowhere else as well.

Lenny (01:04:18):
Did you take that to what you do today? Thinking of people in those three different ways and-

Oji Udezue (01:04:23):
100%. in my professional life, in my personal life, when I interview people, I am cognizant of those three things and I try to extract those three things, because I think it improves your success. Famously, all the weird skill-based interviewing at Google was only 50/50 predictive. And the reason is Google did not consider the other two things, I believe. Bridgewater was willing to endure 80% attrition to arrive at the best people. Now I don't think it works for them because some of their system was not empathetic of humans, like expecting humans to be computers. But I thought that was a very important insight.

Lenny (01:05:08):
Awesome. Oji, is there anything else that you want to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Oji Udezue (01:05:14):
In the history of product development, we have basically started to create abstraction to guide our work versus the Wild, Wild West. So the engineers came up with agile and peer programming and all these things. The designers have come up with design thinking, design sprints, and combined with research to talk about how to do discovery of various complexity. And the question is the product abstractions, because there's code, there's product in this business. So the product and business layer, what is our abstraction? What is our crucible for organizing our work?

(01:05:52):
We don't even have one. We don't have a name for it. And so the idea of a part system is that there's an abstraction above agile and design thinking that we have to pay attention to build solid organizations and to execute well at the product and the business layer. This is a co-creative framework with me and Ezinne. And the idea here is how do you construct a good product system? And literally, you could boil it down into a checklist of the systems you need to build a really good cohesive R and D organization. So I think that's the tee up. I'm going to have to leave you thirsty because someone else is probably going to go deep into it.

Lenny (01:06:35):
Amazing. And that's your wife that you mentioned who you are co-creating this framework with and who we're going to have on the podcast in the future.

Oji Udezue (01:06:40):
That's right.

Lenny (01:06:41):
What is it like being married to another product leader? Would you recommend?

Oji Udezue (01:06:45):
100%, you can have really productive conversations and you can redesign other company's applications in one conversation in the evening.

Lenny (01:06:57):
Amazing. Well, that was almost the lightning round question, but I moved it up earlier. And so with that we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Oji Udezue (01:07:06):
Yeah, I'm ready. Let's do it.

Lenny (01:07:07):
Okay, great. Let's do it. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Oji Udezue (01:07:13):
There's one business book that I recommend, I think it's called The Halo Effect. It's basically a book that lets you call on all these business books that tell you all kinds of stupid shit. It is how to deconstruct what is important in a business and self-help book and what is not important and what is just circumstantial storytelling with random facts and form-fitting evidence. It's called The Halo Effect. Read it. Why do you need to read it? Because garbage in, garbage Out.

(01:07:45):
People were amazed at the Outlier Effect, Malcolm Gladwell, and then people have been tearing it down for 15 years now. But everyone ingested it and thought it was the most important thing. But how do you know what's important to take away from them and what's not? The Halo Effect will help you. And then the other thing is, I read for pleasure because I read a lot for work. And so science fiction is the thing. There's lots to recommend, but I would say that people should either read Dune, Frank Herbert or Foundation by Asimov. If you haven't read those two things and you're a science fiction person, you really should. The world building is incredible. I understand Tolkien and fantasy, but the science fiction side of it is those two books.

Lenny (01:08:32):
There's also a TV series of Foundation now, which I can say recommend absolutely. But it's a beautiful show.

Oji Udezue (01:08:39):
Yeah, no. I haven't watched Foundation yet. I just felt super weird watching it after reading it. And I could only make it through three quarters of Dune. Well one, but I will make it through them. I don't expect them... The books are glorious. If you love prose, the books are, man, crazy. But I will get through them eventually.

Lenny (01:09:04):
I've not actually read Dune, but the movie was incredible. I played the video game Dune where you're just mining spice all day and it's just stuck in my brain forever. Okay, next question. What is a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates that you're interviewing?

Oji Udezue (01:09:18):
I try to ask two. I feel like it's going to give people a cheat sheet when I interview them. But I try to ask two questions. So I'm not a person who does favorites, so it's hard for me to pick favorites. But I ask people to introduce themselves and I think it tells me a lot about them, how they tell about themselves, what they say about themselves and the content of it. I ask people about the things they think they're truly great at and then I ask people the things they think they need to learn. The latter too is about their professional skill, their craft. I think it tells me a lot about how they communicate, it tells me a lot about how thoughtful they are. It tells me a lot about what they're proud of and what they lead into. And those kinds of things are very important to me.

Lenny (01:10:10):
What is a favorite product you recently discovered that you love?

Oji Udezue (01:10:13):
I have been optimizing my workspace a lot. So I'm on a kick right now where I use Windows. I was in the Windows PM and I still have my Windows box. But a lot of people, we use Mac at work and I've used Mac for the last few years. So even though I switched between them, I've spent a lot more time on Mac and my Windows experience is completely optimized. It is perfect. But Mac, I'm like the Windowing sucks, there's all these gaps I see. So I've been trying to figure out how to dial in my Mac experience.

(01:10:49):
I hate the activity monitor, sucks. What's a replacement? The sound. It doesn't support sound through HDMI or sound through... I don't know, just some weird setup. So I've been optimizing that. One particular product that I like in the context of that is Unlocks. It's one man product that allows me to just look at my phone and log into my Mac when I walk up and then locks it when I walk away. And it'll actually detect my proximity. So it'll start the login process while I get close. I think that's incredible and I feel like it improves my productivity.

Lenny (01:11:26):
Very cool. Sounds like a lot of haterade for Macs over here.

Oji Udezue (01:11:30):
Well, for someone who uses it a lot, no, I think pros and cons. I'm no longer paid by Microsoft, so there are things I don't like. But there are also things that the Mac isn't perfect either.

Lenny (01:11:42):
Yeah, indeed. What is a favorite life motto that you repeat to yourself or share with other people, either in work or in life that you find valuable?

Oji Udezue (01:11:52):
I've taken to saying that there's more knowledge outside my head than inside it. And this is a plea for curiosity. I have three main things that are my North Star personally. Obviously when I say personally, I mean everything professionally. Which is originality, curiosity, and wisdom. And so this thing about there's more knowledge outside my head than inside my head is a plea for curiosity, it's a plea for skepticism. It's a plea to be humble about what you know, no matter how old you are, about the world around you, and always be listening for more. Even when you know something, let other people speak because they might add 10% more to the 90% you know. And so being an active listener is very important.

Lenny (01:12:48):
Beautiful. Last question, you are from Nigeria. What is a Nigerian food that you think people need to find and get ASAP?

Oji Udezue (01:12:57):
I'll recommend two, depending on how familiar you are. So if you've never had fried plantain with beef stew-

Lenny (01:13:06):
Oh man, that sounds great.

Oji Udezue (01:13:08):
... then you should stop what you're doing, stop work, whatever you're doing, find your next Nigerian friend and go get some, okay? This is the food that most Nigerians will basically trade years of life to have access to, okay. So that's what I would say. And then the second thing is if you want to be in the in club in Nija, as we call it, you got to try pepper soup.

Lenny (01:13:48):
Pepper soup.

Oji Udezue (01:13:48):
Now, if you all are not into spicy stuff, I'm sorry, the door is close to you. But pepper soup is really... And it is amazing. It'll make you sweat, but it's delicious and you should give it a shot.

Lenny (01:14:05):
Oji, I think we've solved many people's sharp problems. I really appreciate you making time being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Oji Udezue (01:14:16):
I publish on Substack when I have time, you should check it out. It's usually all about things that are beneath the surface. What's behind the thing. I believe that's how you'll find it. I'm on Twitter as well, so you can follow me because I will talk about products. How you can be useful to me is go follow me on Twitter, sign up for updates on the book. If you do, I will draw from that audience to help name the book, to help design the cover for the book. The book is intended to have a freemium because I want this book to be available to people in Africa and India, across the world. So there'll be a free version of it and there'll be premium versions with more tools, more help, and maybe even interviews with luminaries that you care and love as well. And so hopefully that will fund the free side of it as well. So come in, become part of the party, maybe join a pre-read, an early draft read. That is the best way you can help. So this is a call to all PMs and people of goodwill.

Lenny (01:15:29):
Amazing. What a great answer to that question. I'm going to go get some pepper soup and some plantain beef meals. Thank you so much for being here, and I'm going to go get some food.

Oji Udezue (01:15:41):
All right. Thank you, Lenny. It was super enjoyable and love hanging out and God speed.

Lenny (01:15:48):
Bye, everyone.

(01:15:51):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Ronny Kohavi (00:00:00):
I'm very clear that I'm a big fan of test everything, which is any code change that you make, any feature that you introduce has to be in some experiment. Because again, I've observed this sort of surprising result that even small bug fixes, even small changes can sometimes have surprising, unexpected impact.

Ronny Kohavi (00:00:22):
And so I don't think it's possible to experiment too much. You have to allocate sometimes to these high risk, high reward ideas. We're going to try something that's most likely to fail. But if it does win, it's going to be a home run.

Ronny Kohavi (00:00:38):
And you have to be ready to understand and agree that most will fail. And it's amazing how many times I've seen people come up with new designs or a radical new idea. And they believe in it, and that's okay. I'm just cautioning them all the time to say, "If you go for something big, try it out, but be ready to fail 80% of the time."

Lenny (00:01:05):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast, where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard win experiences building and growing today's most successful products.

Lenny (00:01:14):
Today my guest is Ronny Kohavi. Ronny is seen by many as the world expert on A/B testing and experimentation. Most recently, he was VP and technical fellow of relevance at Airbnb where he led their search experience team. Prior to that, he was corporate vice president at Microsoft, where he led Microsoft Experimentation Platform team. Before that, he was director of data mining and personalization at Amazon.

Lenny (00:01:38):
He's currently a full-time advisor and instructor. He's also the author of the go-to book on experimentation called Trustworthy Online Controlled Experiments. And in our show notes, you'll find a code to get a discount on taking his live cohort-based course on Maven.

Lenny (00:01:53):
In our conversation, we get super tactical about A/B testing. Ronny shares his advice for when you should start considering running experiments at your company, how to change your company's culture to be more experiment driven, what are signs your experiments are potentially invalid, why trust is the most important element of a successful experiment, culture, and platform. How to get started if you want to start running experiments at your company. He also explains what actually is a P value and something called Twyman's law, plus some hot takes about Airbnb and experiments in general. This episode is for anyone who's interested in either creating an experiment driven culture at their company or just fine-tuning one that already exists. Enjoy this episode with Ronny Kohavi after a short word from our sponsors.

Lenny (00:02:39):
This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel. Get deep insights into what your users are doing at every stage of the funnel, at a fair price that scales at you grow. Mixpanel gives you quick answers about your users from awareness, to acquisition, through retention. And by capturing website activity, ad data, and multi-touch attribution right in Mixpanel, you can improve every aspect of the full user funnel. Powered by first party behavioral data instead of third party cookies, Mixpanel is built to be more powerful and easier to use than Google Analytics. Explore plans for teams of every size and see what Mixpanel can do for you at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny. And while you're at it, they're also hiring. So check it out at mixpanel.com/friends/lenny.

Lenny (00:03:27):
This episode is brought to you by Round. Round is the private network built by tech leaders for tech leaders. Round combines the best of coaching, learning, and authentic relationships to help you identify where you want to go and accelerate your path to get there, which is why their wait list tops thousands of tech execs. Round is on a mission to shape the future of technology and its impact on society. Leading in tech is uniquely challenging, and doing it well is easiest when surrounded by leaders who understand your day-to-day experiences. When we're meeting and building relationships with the right people, we're more likely to learn, find new opportunities, be dynamic in our thinking, and achieve our goals. Building and managing your network doesn't have to feel like networking. Join Round to surround yourself with leaders from tech's most innovative companies. Build relationships, be inspired, take action. Visit round.tech/apply and use promo code Lenny to skip the wait list. That's round.tech/apply.

Lenny (00:04:30):
Ronny, welcome to the podcast.

Ronny Kohavi (00:04:33):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny (00:04:34):
So you're known by many as maybe the leading expert on A/B testing and experimentation, which I think is something every product company eventually ends up trying to do, often badly. And so I'm excited to dig quite deep into the world of experimentation and A/B testing to help people run better experiments. So thank you again for being here.

Ronny Kohavi (00:04:54):
That's a great goal. Thank you.

Lenny (00:04:56):
Let me start with kind of a fun question. What is maybe the most unexpected A/B tests you've run or maybe the most surprising result from an A/B test that you've run?

Ronny Kohavi (00:05:06):
So I think the opening example that I use in my book and in my class is the most surprising public example we can talk about. And this was kind of an interesting experiment. Somebody proposed to change the way that ads were displayed on Bing, the search engine. And he basically said, "Let's take the second line and move it, promote it to the first line so that the title line becomes larger."

Ronny Kohavi (00:05:37):
And when you think about that, and if you're going to look in my book, or in the class, there's an actual diagram of what happened, the screenshots. But if you think about it, just realistically it looks like a meh idea. Why would this be such a reasonable, interesting thing to do? And indeed, when we went back to the backlog, it was on the backlog for months, and languished there, and many things were rated higher.

Ronny Kohavi (00:06:05):
But the point about this is it's trivial to implement. So if you think about return on investment, we could get the data by having some engineers spend a couple of hours implementing it.

Ronny Kohavi (00:06:19):
And that's exactly what happened. Somebody at Bing who kept seeing this in the backlog and said, "My God, we're spending too much time discussing it. I could just implement it." He did. He spent a couple of days implementing it, as is the common thing at Bing, he launched the experiment.

Ronny Kohavi (00:06:37):
And a funny thing happened. We had an alarm. Big escalation, something is wrong with the revenue metric. Now this alarm fired several times in the past when there were real mistakes, where somebody would log revenue twice, or there's some data problem. But in this case, there was no bug. That simple idea increased revenue by about 12%.

Ronny Kohavi (00:07:01):
And this is something that just doesn't happen. We can talk later about Wyman's law, but that was the first reaction, which is, "This is too good to be true. Let's find a bug." And we did. And we looked for several times, and we replicated the experiment several times, and there was nothing wrong with it. This thing was worth $100 million at the time when Bing was a lot smaller.

Ronny Kohavi (00:07:22):
And the key thing is it didn't hurt the user metrics. So it's very easy to increase revenue by doing theatrics. Displaying more ads is a trivial way to raise revenue, but it hurts the user experience. And we've done the experiments to show that. In this case, this was just a home run that improved revenue, didn't significantly hurt the guardrail metrics. And so we were in awe of what a trivial change. That was the biggest revenue impact to Bing in all its history.

Lenny (00:07:57):
And that was basically shifting in two lines, right? Switching two lines in the search results.

Ronny Kohavi (00:08:02):
And this was just moving the second line to the first line. Now you then go and run a lot of experiments to understand what happened here. Is it the fact that the title line has a bigger font, sometimes different color? So we ran a whole bunch of experiments.

Ronny Kohavi (00:08:16):
And this is what usually happens. We have a breakthrough. You start to understand more about, what can we do? And there suddenly a shift towards, "Okay, what are other things we could do that would allow us to improve revenue?" We came up with a lot of follow on ideas that helped a lot.

Ronny Kohavi (00:08:34):
But to me, this was an example of a tiny change that was the best revenue generating idea in Bing's history, and we didn't rate it properly. Nobody gave this the priority that in hindsight, it deserves. And that's something that happens often. I mean, we are often humbled by how bad we are at predicting the outcome of experiments.

Lenny (00:09:01):
This reminds me of a classic experiment at Airbnb while I was there, and we'll talk about Airbnb in a bit. The search team just ran a small experiment of what if we were to open a new tab every time someone clicked on a search result, instead of just going straight to that listing. And that was one of the biggest wins in search-

Ronny Kohavi (00:09:18):
And by the way, I don't know if you know the history of this, but I tell about this in class. We did this experiment way back around 2008 I think. And so this predates Airbnb. I remember it was heavily debated. Why would you open something in a new tab? The users didn't ask for it. It was a lot of pushback from the designers. And we ran that experiment. And again, it was one of these highly surprising results that made it that we learned so much from it.

Ronny Kohavi (00:09:49):
So we first did this. It was done in the UK for opening Hotmail, and then we moved it to MSN, so it would open search in new tab, and all the set of experiments were highly, highly beneficial. We published this. And I have to tell you, when I came to Airbnb, I talked to our joint friend Ricardo about this. And it was sort of done, it was very beneficial, and then it was semi forgotten, which is one of the things you learned about institutional memories. When you have winners, make sure to address them and remember them. So it was at Airbnb done for a long time before I joined that listings opened in a new tab, but other things that were designed in the future were not done. And I reintroduced this to the team, and we saw big improvements.

Lenny (00:10:35):
Shout out to Ricardo, our mutual friend who helped make this conversation happen. There's this holy grail of experiments that I think people are always looking for of one hour of work and it creates this massive result. I imagine this is very rare, and don't expect this to happen. I guess in your experience, how often do you find one of these gold nuggets just lying around?

Ronny Kohavi (00:10:57):
Yeah. So again, this is a topic that's near and dear to my heart. Everybody wants these amazing results, and I show them in chapter one in my book, multiple of these small efforts, huge gain.

Ronny Kohavi (00:11:13):
But as you said, they're very rare. I think most of the time, the winnings are made this inch by inch. And there's a graph that I show in my book, a real graph of how Bing ads has managed to improve the revenue per a thousand searches over time, and every month you can see a small improvement and a small improvement. Sometimes the degradation because of legal reasons or other things. There were some concern that we were not marking the ads properly. So you have to suddenly do something that you know is going to hurt revenue. But yes, I think most results are inch by inch. You improve small amounts, lots of them. I think that the best example that I can say is a couple of them that I can speak about.

Ronny Kohavi (00:12:00):
One is at Bing, the relevance team, hundreds of people all working to improve bing relevance. They have a metric, we'll talk about OEC, the overall evaluation criterion. But they have a metric that their goal is to improve it by 2% every year. It's a small amount, and that 2% you can see here's a 0.1, and here's a 0.15, here's a 0.2, and then they add up to around 2% every year, which is amazing.

Ronny Kohavi (00:12:28):
Another example that I am allowed to speak about from Airbnb is the fact that we ran some 250 experiments in my tenure there in search relevance. And again, small improvements added up. So this became overall a 6% improvement to revenue. So when you think about 6%, it's a big number, but it came out not of one idea, but many, many smaller ideas that each gave you a small gain.

Ronny Kohavi (00:13:00):
And in fact, again, there's another number I'm allowed to say. Of these experiments, 92% failed to improve the metric that we were trying to move. So only 8% of our ideas actually were successful at moving the key metrics.

Lenny (00:13:17):
There's so many threads I want to follow here, but let me follow this one right here. You just mentioned of 92% of experiments failed. Is that typical in your experience seeing experiments running a lot of companies? What should people expect when they're running experiments? What percentage should they expect to fail?

Ronny Kohavi (00:13:31):
Well, first of all, I published three different numbers for my career. So overall at Microsoft, about 66%, two thirds of ideas fail. And don't think the 66 is accurate. It's about two thirds. At Bing, which is a much more optimized domain after we've been optimizing it for a while, the failure rate was around 85%. So it's harder to improve something that you've been optimizing for a while. And then at Airbnb, this 92% number is the highest failure rate that I've observed.

Ronny Kohavi (00:14:09):
Now I've quoted other sources. It's not that I worked at groups that were particularly bad, Booking, Google Ads, other companies published numbers that are around 80 to 90% failure rate of ideas. This is where it's important of experiments. It's important to realize that when you have a platform, it's easy to get this number. You look at how many experiments were run and how many of them launched. Not every experiment maps to an idea.

Ronny Kohavi (00:14:39):
So it's possible that when you have an idea, your first implementation, you start an experiment. Boom, it's egregiously bad, because you have a bug. In fact, 10% of experiments tend to be aborted on the first date. Those are usually not that the idea is bad, but that there is an implementation issue or something we haven't thought about, that forces an abort.

Ronny Kohavi (00:15:01):
You may iterate and pivot again. And ultimately, if you do two, or three, or four pivots or bug fixes, you may get to a successful launch. But those numbers of 80 to 92% failure rate are of experiments.

Ronny Kohavi (00:15:17):
Very humbling. I know that every group that starts to run experiments, they always start off by thinking that somehow, they're different. And their success rate's going to be much, much higher, and they're all humbled.

Lenny (00:15:29):
You mentioned that you had this pattern of clicking a link and opening a new tab as a thing that just worked at a lot of different places.

Ronny Kohavi (00:15:36):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:15:37):
Are there other versions of this? Do you do you collect a list of, "Here's things that often work when we want to move" there's some you could share. I don't know if you have a list in your head.

Ronny Kohavi (00:15:48):
I can give you two resources. One of them is a paper that we wrote called Rules of Thumb, and what we tried to do at that time at Microsoft was to just look at thousands of experiments that run and extract some patterns. And so that's one paper that we can then put in the notes.

Lenny (00:16:07):
Perfect.

Ronny Kohavi (00:16:08):
But there's another more accurate, I would say, resource that's useful that I recommend to people. And it's a site called goodui.org, and goodui.org is exactly the site that tries to do what you're saying at scale.

Ronny Kohavi (00:16:25):
So guy's name is Jacob [inaudible 00:16:28]. He asks people to send them results of experiments, and he puts them into patterns. There's probably 140 patterns I think at this point. And then for each pattern he says, "Well, who has that helped? How many times and by how much?" So you have an idea of this worked, three out of five times. And it was a huge win. In fact, you can find that open a new window in there.

Lenny (00:16:54):
I feel like you feed that into ChatGPT, and you have basically a product manager creating a roadmap tool.

Ronny Kohavi (00:17:01):
In general, by the way, a lot of that is institutional memory, which is can you document things well enough so that the organization remembers the successes and failures, and learns from them?

Ronny Kohavi (00:17:17):
I think one of the mistakes that some company makes is they launch a lot of experiments and never go back and summarize the learnings. So I've actually put a lot of effort in this idea of institutional learning, of doing the quarterly meeting of the most surprising experiments.

Ronny Kohavi (00:17:32):
By the way, surprising is another question that people often are not clear about. What is a surprising experiment? To me, a surprising experiment is one where the estimated result beforehand and the actual result differ by a lot. So that absolute value of the difference is large.

Ronny Kohavi (00:17:53):
Now you can expect something to be great and it's flat. Well, you learn something. But if you expect something to be small and it turns out to be great, like that ad title promotion, then you've learned a lot. Or conversely, if you expect that something will be small and it's very negative, you can learn a lot by understanding why this was so negative. And that's interesting.

Ronny Kohavi (00:18:17):
So we focused not just on the winners, but also surprising losers, things that people thought would be a no-brainer to run. And then for some reason, it was very negative. And sometimes, it's that negative that gives you insight. Actually, I'm just coming up with one example that of that, that I should mention.

Ronny Kohavi (00:18:36):
We were running this experiment at Microsoft to improve the windows indexer, and the team was able to show on offline tests that it does much better at indexing, and they showed some relevance is higher, and all these good things. And then they ran it as an experiment. You know what happened? Surprising result. Indexing the relevance was actually high, but it killed a battery life.

Ronny Kohavi (00:19:03):
So here's something that comes from left field that you didn't expect. It was consuming a lot more CPU on laptops. It was killing the laptops. And therefore, okay, we learned something. Let's document it. Let's remember this, so that we now take this other factor into account as we design the next iteration.

Lenny (00:19:23):
What advice do you have for people to actually remember these surprises? You said that a lot of it is institutional. What do you recommend people do so that they can actually remember this when people leave, say three years later?

Ronny Kohavi (00:19:34):
Document it. We had a large deck internally of these successes and failures, and we encourage people to look at them. The other thing that's very beneficial is just to have your whole history of experiments and do some ability to search by keywords.

Ronny Kohavi (00:19:52):
So I have an idea. Type a few keywords and see if from the thousands of experiments that ran... And by the way, these are very reasonable numbers. At Microsoft, just to let you know, when I left in 2019, we were on a rate of about 20 to 25,000 experiments every year. So every working, day we were starting something like 100 new treatments. Big numbers. So when you're running in a group like Bing, which is running thousands and thousands of experiments, you want to be able to ask, "Has anybody did an experiment on this or this or this?" And so that searching capability is in the platform.

Ronny Kohavi (00:20:32):
But more than that, I think just doing the quarterly meeting of the most successful... Most interesting, sorry, not just successful, most interesting experiments is very key. And that also helps the flywheel of experimentation.

Lenny (00:20:45):
It's a good segue to something I wanted to touch on, which is there's often, I guess a weariness of running too many experiments and being too data-driven, and the sense that experimentation just leads you to these micro optimizations, and you don't really innovate and do big things. What's your perspective on that? And then, can you be too experiment driven in your experience?

Ronny Kohavi (00:21:07):
I'm very clear that I'm a big fan of test everything, which is any code change that you make, any feature that you introduce has to be in some experiment. Because again, I've observed this surprising result that even small bug fixes, even small changes can sometimes have surprising unexpected impact.

Ronny Kohavi (00:21:30):
And so I don't think it's possible to experiment too much. I think it is possible to focus on incremental changes because some people say, "Well, if we only tested 17 things around this," you have to think about, it's like in stock. You need a portfolio. You need some experiments that are incremental that move you in the direction that you know you're going to be successful over time if you just try enough. But some experiments, you have to allocate sometimes to these high risk, high reward ideas. We're going to try something that's most likely to fail, but if it does win, it's going to be a home run.

Ronny Kohavi (00:22:14):
And so you have to allocate some efforts to that, and you have to be ready to understand and agree that most will fail. And I've amazing how many times I've seen people come up with new designs, or a radical new idea, and they believe in it, and that's okay. I'm just cautioning them all the time to say, "Hey, if you go for something big, try it out, but be ready to fail 80% of the time."

Ronny Kohavi (00:22:42):
And one true example, that again, I'm able to talk about because we put it in my book, is we were at Bing trying to change the landscape of search. And one of the ideas, the big ideas was we are going to integrate with social. So we hooked into the Twitter fire hose feed and we hooked into Facebook, and we spent 100 person years on this idea.

Ronny Kohavi (00:23:14):
And it failed. You don't see it anymore. It existed for about a year and a half, and all the experiments were just negative to flat. And it was an attempt. It was fair to try it. I think it took us a little long to fail, to decide that this is a failure. But at least we had the data. We had hundreds of experiments that we tried. None of them were a breakthrough. And I remember mailing Qi Lu with some statistics showing that it's time to abort, it's time to fail on this. And he decided to continue more. And it's a million dollar question. Do you continue, and then maybe the breakthrough will come next month, or do you abort? And a few months later, we aborted.

Lenny (00:24:07):
That reminds me of at Netflix, they tried a social component that also failed. At Airbnb, early on there was a big social attempt to make, "Here's your friends that have stayed at these Airbnbs," completely had no impact. So maybe that's one of these learnings that we should document.

Ronny Kohavi (00:24:21):
Yeah, this is hard. This is hard. But again, that's the value of experiments, which are this oracle that gives you the data. You may be excited about things. You may believe it's a good idea. But ultimately, the oracle is the controlled experiment. It tells you whether users are actually benefiting from it, whether you and the users, the company and the users.

Lenny (00:24:48):
There's obviously a bit of overhead and downside to running an experiment, setting all up, and analyzing the results. Is there anything that you ever don't think is worth A/B testing?

Ronny Kohavi (00:24:59):
First of all, there are some necessary ingredients to A/B testing. And I'll just say outright, not every domain is amenable to A/B testing. You can't A/B test mergers and acquisitions. It's something that happens once, you either acquire or you don't acquire.

Ronny Kohavi (00:25:14):
So you do have to have some necessary ingredient. You need to have enough units, mostly users, in order for the statistics to work out. So if you're too small, it may be too early to A/B test. But what I find is that in software, it is so easy to run A/B testing and it is so easy to build a platform.

Ronny Kohavi (00:25:39):
I don't say it's easy to build a platform. But once you build a platform, the incremental cost of running an experiment should approach zero. And we got to that at Microsoft, where after a while, the cost of running experiments was so low that nobody was questioning the idea that everything should be experimented with.

Ronny Kohavi (00:25:59):
Now, I don't think we were there at Airbnb for example. The platform at Airbnb was much less mature, and required a lot more analysts in order to interpret the results and to find issues with it. So I do think there's this trade off. You're willing to invest in the platform. It is possible to get the marginal cost to be close to zero. But when you're not there, it's still expensive, and there may be reasons why not to run A/B tests.

Lenny (00:26:28):
You talked about how you may be too small to run A/B tests, and this is a constant question for startups is, when should we start running A/B tests? Do you have kind of a heuristic or a rule of thumb of, here's a time you should really start thinking about running an A/B test?

Ronny Kohavi (00:26:42):
Yeah, a dollar question that everybody asks. So actually, we'll put this in the notes, but I gave a talk last year, what I called it is practical defaults. And one of the things I show there is that unless you have at least tens of thousands of users, the math, the statistics just don't work out for most of the metrics that you're interested in.

Ronny Kohavi (00:27:05):
In fact, I gave an actual practical number of a retail site with some conversion rate, trying to detect changes that are at least 5% beneficial, which is something that startups should focus on. They shouldn't focus on the 1%, they should focus on the 5 and 10%. Then you need something like 200,000 users.

Ronny Kohavi (00:27:25):
So start experimenting when you're in the tens of thousands of users. You'll only be able to detect large effects. And then once you get to 200,000 users, then the magic starts happening. Then you can start testing a lot more. Then you have the ability to test everything and make sure that you're not degrading and getting value out of experimentation. So you ask for rule of thumb, 200,000 users, you're magical. Below that, start building the culture, start building the platform, start integrating. So that as you scale, you start to see the value.

Lenny (00:28:00):
Love it. Coming back to this kind of concern people have of experimentation, keeps you from innovating and taking big bets, I know you have this framework overall evaluation criterion, and I think that helps with this. Can you talk a bit about that?

Ronny Kohavi (00:28:14):
The OEC or the overall evaluation criterion is something that I think many people that start to dabble in A/B testing miss. And the question is, what are you optimizing for? And it's a much harder question that people think because it's very easy to say we're going to optimize for money, revenue. But that's the wrong question, because you can do a lot of bad things that will improve revenue. So there has to be some countervailing metric that tells you, how do I improve revenue without hurting the user experience?

Ronny Kohavi (00:28:53):
So let's take a good example with search. You can put more ads on a page and you will make more money. There's no doubt about it. You will make more money in the short term. The question is, what happens to the user experience, and how is that going to impact you in the long term?

Ronny Kohavi (00:29:13):
So we've run those experiments, and we were able to map out this number of ads causes this much increase to churn, this number of ads causes this much increase to the time that users take to find a successful result. And we came up with an OEC that is based on all these metrics that allows you to say, "Okay, I'm willing to take this additional money if I'm not hurting the user experience by more than this much." So there's a trade-off there.

Ronny Kohavi (00:29:41):
One of the nice ways to phrase this, as a constraint optimization problem. I want you to increase revenue, but I'm going to give you a fixed amount of average real estate that you can use. So for one query, you can have zero ads. For another query, you can have three ads. For a third query, you can have wider, bigger ads. I'm just going to count the pixels that you take, the vertical pixels. And I will give you some budget. And if you can under the same budget make more money, you're good to go.

Ronny Kohavi (00:30:16):
So that to me turns the problem from a badly defined, let's just make more money. Any page can start plastering more ads and make more money short term, but that's not the goal. The goal is long-term growth and revenue. Then you need to insert these other criteria, and what am I doing to the user experience? One way around it is to put this constraint. Another one is just to have these other metrics. Again, something that we did, to look at the user experience. How long does it take the user to reach a successful click? What percentage of sessions are successful? These are key metrics that were part of the overall evaluation criteria, that we've used.

Ronny Kohavi (00:30:55):
I can give you another example by the way, from the hotel industry or Airbnb that we both worked at. You can say, "I want to improve conversion rate," but you can be smarter about it and say, "It's not just enough to convert a user to buy or to pay for a listing. I want them to be happy with it several months down the road when they actually stay there."

Ronny Kohavi (00:31:19):
So that could be part of your OEC to say, "What is the rating that they will give to that listing when they actually stay there?" And that causes an interesting problem, because you don't have this data now. You're going to have it three months from now when they actually stay. So you have to build the training set that allows you to make a prediction about whether this user, whether Lenny is going to be happy at this cheap place. Or whether no, I should offer him something more expensive, because Lenny likes to stay at nicer places where the water actually is hot and comes out of the faucet.

Lenny (00:31:52):
That is true. Okay, so it sounds like the core to this approach is basically have a drag metric that makes sure you're not hurting something that's really important to the business, and then being very clear on what's the long-term metric we care most about.

Ronny Kohavi (00:32:05):
To me, the key word is lifetime value, which is you have to define the OEC such that it is causally predictive of the lifetime value of the user. And that's what causes you to think about things properly, which is, am I doing something that just helps me short term, or am I doing something that will help me in the long term? Once you put that model of lifetime value, people say, "Okay, what about retention rates? We can measure that. What about the time to achieve a task? We can measure that." And those are these countervailing metrics that make the OEC useful.

Lenny (00:32:43):
And to understand these longer term metrics, what I'm hearing is use models, and forecast, and predictions, or would you suggest sometimes use a long-term holdout or some other approach? What do you find is the best way to see these long term?

Ronny Kohavi (00:32:57):
Yeah, so there's two ways that I like to think about it. One is you can run long-term experiments for the goal of learning something. So I mentioned that at Bing, we did run these experiments where we increased the ads and decreased the ads, so that we will understand what happens to key metrics.

Ronny Kohavi (00:33:16):
The other thing is you can just build models that use some of our background knowledge or use some data science to look at historical... I'll give you another good example of this. When I came to Amazon, one of the teams that reported to me was the email team that it was not the transactional emails when you buy something, you get an email. But it was the team that sent these recommendations. "Here's a book by an author that you bought. Here's a product that we recommend." And the question is, how do we give credit to that team?

Ronny Kohavi (00:33:49):
And the initial version was, whenever a user comes from the email and purchases something on Amazon, we're going to give that email credit. Well, it turned out this had no countervailing metric. The more emails you send, the more money you're going to credit the team. And so that led to spam. Literally a really interesting problem. The team just ramped up the number of emails that they were sending out, and claimed to make more money, and their fitness function improved.

Ronny Kohavi (00:34:20):
So then we backed up and then we said, "Okay, we can either phrase this as a constraint satisfaction problem. You're allowed to send user an email every X days or," which is what we ended up doing is, "Let's model the cost of spamming the users."

Ronny Kohavi (00:34:37):
What's that cost? Well, when they unsubscribe, we can't mail them. So we did some data science study on the side and we said, "What is the value that we're losing from an unsubscribe?" And we came up with a number, it was a few dollars. But the point was, now we have this countervailing metric. We say, "Here's the money that we generate from the emails. Here's the money that we're losing on long-term value. What's the trade-off?" And then when we started to incorporate those formula, more than half the campaigns that were being sent were negative.

Ronny Kohavi (00:35:14):
So it was a huge insight at Amazon about how to send the right campaigns. And this is what I like about these discoveries. This fact that we integrated the unsubscribe led us to a new feature to say, "Well, let's not lose their future lifetime value through email. When they unsubscribe, let's offer them by default to unsubscribe from this campaign."

Ronny Kohavi (00:35:41):
So when you get an email, there's a new book by the author. The default to unsubscribe would be unsubscribe me from author emails. And so now, the negative, the countervailing metric is much smaller. And so again, this was a breakthrough in our ability to send more emails, and understand based on what users were unsubscribing from, which ones are really beneficial.

Lenny (00:36:06):
I love the surprising results.

Ronny Kohavi (00:36:08):
We all love them. This is the humbling reality. And people talk about the fact that A/B testing sometimes leads you to incremental... I actually think that many of these small insights lead to fundamental insights about which areas to go, some strategies we should take, some things we should develop. Helps a lot.

Lenny (00:36:31):
This makes me think about how every time I've done a full redesign of a product, I don't think ever, has it ever been a positive result. And then the team always ends up having to claw back what they just hurt and try to figure out what they messed up. Is that your experience too?

Ronny Kohavi (00:36:47):
Absolutely, yeah. In fact, I've published some of these in LinkedIn posts showing a large set of big launches and redesigns that dramatically failed, and it happens very often. So the right way to do this is to say, "Yes, we want to do a redesign, but let's do it in steps and test on the way and adjust," so you don't need to take 17 new changes, that many of them are going to fail. Start to move incrementally in a direction that you believe is beneficial. Adjust on the way.

Lenny (00:37:24):
The worst part of those experiences I find is it took three to six months to build it. And by the time it's launched, it's just like, "We're not going to unlaunch this. Everyone's been working in this direction. All the new features are assuming this is going to work," and you're basically stuck.

Ronny Kohavi (00:37:41):
I mean, this is a sunk cost fallacy. We invested so many years in it. Let's launch this, even though it's bad for the user. No, that's terrible. Yeah. Yeah. So this is the other advantage of recognizing this humble reality that most ideas fail. If you believe in that statistics that I published, then doing 17 changes together is more likely to be negative. Do them in smaller increments, learn from, it's called OFAT one-factor-at-a-time. Do one factor, learn from it, and adjust. Of the 17, maybe you have four good ideas. Those are the ones that will launch and be positive.

Lenny (00:38:22):
I generally agree with that, and always try to avoid a big redesign, but it's hard to avoid them completely. There's often team members that are really passionate like, "We just need to rethink this whole experience. We're not going to incrementally get there." Have you found anything effective in helping people either see this perspective, or just making a larger bet more successful?

Ronny Kohavi (00:38:42):
By the way, I'm not opposed to large redesigns. I try to give the team the data to say, "Look, here are lots of examples where big redesigns fail." Try to decompose your redesign if you can't decompose it to one factor at a time, to a small set of factors at a time. And learn from these smaller changes what works and what doesn't.

Ronny Kohavi (00:39:08):
Now, it's also possible to do a complete redesign. Just, as you said yourself, be ready to fail. I mean, do you really want to work on something for six months or a year, and then run the A/B test, and realize that you've hurt revenues or other key metrics by several percentage points? And a data-driven organization will not allow you to launch. What are you going to write in your annual review?

Lenny (00:39:33):
But nobody ever thinks it's going to fail. They think, "No, we got this. We've talked to so many people."

Ronny Kohavi (00:39:38):
But I think organizations that start to run experiments are humbled early on from the smaller changes. Right? You're right. I'll tell you a funny story. When I came from Amazon to Microsoft, I joined the group, and for one reason or another, that group disbanded a month after I joined.

Ronny Kohavi (00:39:57):
And so people came to me and said, "Look, you just joined the company. You're at partner level. You figure out how you can help Microsoft." And I said, "I'm going to build an experimentation platform," because nobody at Microsoft is running experiments. And more than 50% of ideas in Amazon that we tried failed. And the classical response was, "We have better PMs here."

Ronny Kohavi (00:40:26):
Right? There was this complete denial that it's possible that 50% of ideas that Microsoft is implementing, in a three-year development cycle by the way. This is how long it took Office to release. It was a classical every three years we release.

Ronny Kohavi (00:40:42):
And the data came about showing that Bing was the first to truly implement experimentation at scale. And we shared with the rest of the companies the surprising results. And so when Office was... And this was credit to Qi Lu and Satya Nadella, they were ones that says, "Ronny, you try to get Office to run experiments. We'll give you the air support." And it was hard, but we did it. It took a while, but Office started to run experiments, and they realized that many of their ideas are failing.

Lenny (00:41:20):
You said that there's a site of a failed redesigns. Is that in your book or is that a site that you can point people to, to help build this case?

Ronny Kohavi (00:41:29):
I teach this in my class, but I think I've posted this on LinkedIn and answered some questions. I'm happy to put that in the notes.

Lenny (00:41:36):
Okay, cool. We'll put that in the show notes. Because I think that's the kind of data that often helps convince a team, "Maybe we shouldn't rethink this entire onboarding flow from scratch. Maybe we should iterate towards and learn as we go."

Lenny (00:41:48):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments.

Lenny (00:42:02):
Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern growth team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool.

Lenny (00:42:15):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform, where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage.

Lenny (00:42:25):
Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytic cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click through metrics, and instead use your North Star metrics like activation, retention, subscription and payments. Eppo supports tests on the front end, on the back end, email marketing, even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, that's geteppo.com, and 10X your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:42:55):
Is it ever worth just going, "Let's just rethink this whole thing and just give it a shot," to break out of a local minima or local maxima essentially?

Ronny Kohavi (00:43:03):
Yeah. So I think what you said is fair. I do want to allocate some percentage of resources to big bets. As you said, we've been optimizing this thing to hell. Could we completely redesign it? It's a very valid idea. You may be able to break out of a local minima. What I'm telling you is 80% of the time, you will fail. So be ready for that. What people usually expect is, "My redesign is going to work." No, you're most likely going to fail, but if you do succeed, it's a breakthrough.

Lenny (00:43:35):
I like this 80% rule of thumb. Is that just a simple way of thinking about it? 80% of your-

Ronny Kohavi (00:43:39):
That's my rule of thumb. And I've heard people say it's 70% or 80%. But it's in that area where I think when you talk about how much to invest in the known versus the high risk, high reward, that's usually the right percentage that most organizations end up doing this allocation, right? You interviewed Shreyas. I think he mentioned that Google is like 70% the searching ads, and it's 20% for some of the apps and new stuff, and then it's the 10% for infrastructure.

Lenny (00:44:16):
And I think the most important point there is if you're not running an experiment, 70% of stuff you're shipping is hurting your business.

Ronny Kohavi (00:44:23):
Well, it's not hurting, it's flat too negative. Some of them are flat. And by the way, flat to me, if something is not Statsig, that's a no ship, because you've just introduced more code. There is a maintenance overhead to shipping your stuff. I've heard people say, "Look, we already spent all this time. The team will be demotivated if we don't ship it." And I'm, "No, that's wrong guys. Let's make sure that we understand that shipping this project has no value, is complicating the code base. Maintenance costs will go up." You don't ship on flat, unless it's a legal requirement. When legal comes along and says, "You have to do X or Y," you have to ship on flat or even negative. And that's understandable.

Ronny Kohavi (00:45:08):
But again, I think that's something that a lot of people make the mistake of saying, "Legal told us we have to do this, therefore we're going to take the hits." No, legal gave you a framework that you have to work under. Try three different things, and ship the one that hurts the least.

Lenny (00:45:25):
That reminds me when Airbnb launched the rebrand, even that they ran as an experiment with the entire homepage redesigned, the new logo, and all that. And I think there was a long-term holdout even, and I think it was positive in the end from what I remember.

Lenny (00:45:41):
Speaking of Airbnb, I want to chat about Airbnb briefly. I know you're limited in what you can share, but it's interesting that Airbnb seems to be moving in this other direction where it's becoming a lot more top-down, Brian vision oriented. And Brian's even talked about how he's less motivated to run experiments. He doesn't want to run as many experiments as they used to. Things are going well, and so it's hard to argue with the success potentially. You worked there for many years. You ran the search team essentially. I guess, what was your experience like there? And then roughly, what's your sense of how things are going, where it's going?

Ronny Kohavi (00:46:15):
Well as you know, I'm restricted from talking about Airbnb. I will say a few things that I am allowed to say. One is in my team in search relevance, everything was A/B tested. So while Brian can focus on some of the design aspects, the people who are actually doing the neural networks and the search, everything was A/B tested to hell. So nothing was launching without an A/B test. We had targets around improving certain metrics, and everything was done A/B test.

Ronny Kohavi (00:46:50):
Now other teams, some did, some did not. I will say that when you say things are going well, I think we don't know the counterfactual. I believe that had Airbnb kept people like Greg Greeley, which was pushing for a lot more data driven, and had Airbnb run more experiments, it would've been in a better state than today. But it's the counterfactual. We don't know.

Lenny (00:47:14):
That's a really interesting perspective. Airbnb's such an interesting natural experiment of a way of doing things differently. There's de-emphasizing experiments, and also, they turned off paid ads during Covid. And I don't know where it is now, but it feels like it's become a much smaller part of the growth strategy. Who knows if they've ramped it up to back to where it's today, but I think it's going to be a really interesting case study looking back five, 10 years from now.

Ronny Kohavi (00:47:38):
It's a one-off experiment where it's hard to assign value to some of the things that Airbnb is doing. I personally believe it could have been a lot bigger and a lot more successful if it had run more controlled experiments. But I can't speak about some of those that I ran and that showed that some of the things that were initially untested were actually negative and could be better.

Lenny (00:48:04):
All right. Mysterious. One more question. Airbnb, you were there during Covid, which was quite a wild time for Airbnb. We had Sanchan on the podcast talking about all the craziness that went on when travel basically stopped, and there was a sense that Airbnb was done, and travel's not going to happen for years and years. What's your take on experimentation in that world where you have to really move fast, make crazy decisions, and make big decisions? What was it like during that time?

Ronny Kohavi (00:48:34):
So I think actually in a state like that, it's even more important to run A/B tests, right? Because what you want to be able to see is if we're making this change, is it actually helping in the current environment? There's this idea of external generalizability. Is it going to work out now during Covid? Is it going to generalize later on? These are things that you can really answer with the controlled experiments, and sometimes it means that you might have to replicate them six months down when Covid say is not as impactful as it is.

Ronny Kohavi (00:49:11):
Saying that you have to make decisions quickly, to me, I'll point you to the success rate. If in peace time you're wrong two thirds to 80% of the time, why would you be subtly right in wartime, in Covid time?

Ronny Kohavi (00:49:26):
So I don't believe in the idea that because bookings went down materially, the company should suddenly not be data driven and do things differently. I think if Airbnb stayed the course, did nothing, the revenue would've gone up in the same way.

Lenny (00:49:49):
Fascinating.

Ronny Kohavi (00:49:49):
In fact, if you look at one investment, one big investment that was done at the time was online experiences, and the initial data wasn't very promising. And I think today, it's a footnote.

Lenny (00:50:01):
Yeah. Another case study for the history books, Airbnb experiences. I want to shift a little bit and talk about your book, which you mentioned a couple times. It's called Trustworthy Online Controlled Experiments, and I think it's basically the book on A/B testing. Let me ask you, what surprised you most about writing this book, and putting it out, and the reaction to it?

Ronny Kohavi (00:50:24):
I was pleasantly surprised that it sold more than what we thought, more than what Cambridge predicted. So when first we were approached by Cambridge after a tutorial that we did to write a book, I was like, "I don't know, this is too small of a niche area."

Ronny Kohavi (00:50:47):
And they were saying, "So you'll be able to sell a few thousand copies and help the world." And I found my co-authors, which are great. And we wrote a book that we thought is not statistically oriented, has fewer formulas than you normally see, and focuses on the practical aspects and on trust, which is the key.

Ronny Kohavi (00:51:10):
The book, as I said, was more successful. It sold over 20,000 copies in English. It was translated to Chinese, Korean, Japanese, and Russian. And so it's great to see that we help the world become more data-driven with experimentation, and I'm happy because of that. I was pleasantly surprised.

Ronny Kohavi (00:51:31):
By the way, all proceeds from the book are donated to charity. So if I'm pitching the book here, there is no financial gain for me from having more copies sold. I think we made that decision, which was a good decision. All proceeds go with the charity.

Lenny (00:51:47):
Amazing. I didn't know that. We'll link to the book in the show notes. Trust is in the title. You just mentioned how important trust is to experimentation. A lot of people talk about, "How do I run experiments faster?" You focus a lot on trust. Why is trust so important in running experiments?

Ronny Kohavi (00:52:03):
So to me, the experimentation platform is the safety net, and it's an oracle. So it serves really two purposes. The safety net means that if you launch something bad, you should be able to abort quickly, right? Safe deployments, safe velocity. There's some names for this. But this is one key value that the platform can give you.

Ronny Kohavi (00:52:25):
The other one, which is the more standard one, is at the end of the two-week experiment, we will tell you what happened to your key metric and to many of the other surrogate, and debugging, and guardrail metrics. Trust builds up, it's easy to lose.

Ronny Kohavi (00:52:43):
And so to me, it is very important that when you present this and say, "This is science, this is a controlled experiment, this is the resolve," you better believe that this is trustworthy.

Ronny Kohavi (00:52:57):
And so I focus on that a lot. I think it allowed us to gain the organizational trust that this is really... And the nice thing is when we built all this checks to make sure that the experiment is correct, if there were something wrong with it, we would stop and say, "Hey, something is wrong with the experiment."

Ronny Kohavi (00:53:17):
And I think that's something that some of the early implementations in other places did not do, and it was a big mistake. I've mentioned this in my book so I can mention this here.

Ronny Kohavi (00:53:28):
Optimizely in its early days were very statistically naive. They sort of said, "Hey, we're real time. We can compute your P values in real time," and then you can stop an experiment when the P value is statistically significant. That is a big mistake. That inflates your, what's called type one error or the false positive rate materially. So if you think you've got a 5% type one error, or you aim for that P value less than 0.05, using real time P value monitoring to optimize the offer, you would probably have a 30% error rate.

Ronny Kohavi (00:54:06):
So what this led is that people that started using Optimizely thought that the platform was telling them they were very successful. But when they actually started to see, "Well it told us this is positive revenue, but I don't see this over time. By now, we should have made double the money."

Ronny Kohavi (00:54:23):
So their questions started to come up around the trust in the platform. There's a very famous post that somebody wrote about how, "Optimizely almost got me fired," by a person who basically said, "Look, I came to the org. I said, 'We have all these successes.' But then I said, 'Something is wrong.'"

Ronny Kohavi (00:54:40):
And he tells of how he ran an A/A test when there is no difference between the A and the B. And Optimizely told him that it was statistically significant too many times. Optimizely learned. Optimizely, several people pointed, I pointed this out in my Amazon review of the book that the authors wrote early on. I said, "Hey, you're not doing the statistics correctly."

Ronny Kohavi (00:55:05):
Ramesh Johari at Stanford pointed this out, became a consultant to the company, and then they fixed it. But to me, that's a very good example of how to lose trust. They lost a lot of trust in the market. They lost all this trust because they built something that had very much inflated error rate.

Lenny (00:55:26):
That is pretty scary to think about you've been running all these experiments, and they weren't actually telling you accurate results. What are signs that what you're doing may not be valid if you're starting to run experiments? And then how do you avoid having that situation? What kind of tips can you share for people trying to run experiments?

Ronny Kohavi (00:55:47):
There's a whole chapter of that in my book, but I'll say one of the things that is the most common occurrence by far, which is a sample ratio mismatch. Now, what is a sample ratio mismatch?

Ronny Kohavi (00:56:00):
If you design the experiment to send 50% of users to control and 50% of users to treatment, it's supposed to be a random number, or a hash function. If you get something off from 50%, it's a red flag.

Ronny Kohavi (00:56:15):
So let's take a real example. Let's say you're running an experiment, and it's large, it's got a million users, and you've got 50.2. So people say, "Well, I don't know. It's not going to be exactly the same as 50.2. Reasonable or not?" Well, there's a formula that you can plug in. I have a spreadsheet available for those that are interested, and you can tell, here's how many users are in control. Here's how many users have in treatment. My design was 50/50, and it tells you the probability that this could have happened by chance.

Ronny Kohavi (00:56:45):
Now in a case like this, you plug in the numbers, it might tell you that this should happen one in half a million experiments. Well, unless you've run half a million experiment, very unlikely that you would get a 50.2 versus 49.8 split. And therefore, something is wrong with the experiment.

Ronny Kohavi (00:57:06):
I remember when we implemented this check, we were surprised to see how many experiments suffered from this. Right? And there's a paper that was published, 2018, where we share that at Microsoft, even though we'd be running experiments for a while, is around 8% of experiments that suffered from the sample ratio mismatch.

Ronny Kohavi (00:57:29):
And it's a big number. I think about this. You're running 20,000 experiments a year. So many of them, 8% of them are invalid. And somebody has to go down and understand, what happened here? We know that we can't trust the results, but why?

Ronny Kohavi (00:57:44):
So over time, you begin to understand there's something wrong with the data pipeline. There's something that happens with bots. Bots are a very common factor for causing sample ratio mismatch. So that paper that was published by my team talks about how to diagnose sample ratio mismatches.

Ronny Kohavi (00:58:06):
In the last probably year and a half, it was amazing to see all these third party companies implement sample ratio mismatches, and all of them were reporting, "Oh my god, 6%, 8%, 10%." So it's sometimes fun to go back and say, how many of your results in the past were invalid before you had this sample ratio mismatched test?

Lenny (00:58:32):
Yeah, that's frightening. Is the most common reason this happens is you're assigning users in the wrong place in your code?

Ronny Kohavi (00:58:40):
So when you say most common, I think the most common is bots. Somehow, they hit the controller, the treatment in different proportions. Because you change the website, the bot may fail to parse the page, and try to hit it more often. And that's a classical example. Another one is just the data pipeline.

Ronny Kohavi (00:58:58):
We've had cases where we were trying to remove bad traffic under certain conditions, and it was skewed because of the control and treatment. I've seen people that start an experiment in the middle of the site on some page, but they don't realize that some campaign is pushing people from the side.

Ronny Kohavi (00:59:13):
So there's multiple reasons. It is surprising how often this happens. And I'll tell you a funny story, which is when we first added this test to the platform, we just put a banner say, "You have a sample ratio mismatch. Do not trust these results." And we noticed that people ignored it. They were starting to present results that had this banner.

Ronny Kohavi (00:59:37):
And so we blanked out the scorecard. We put a big red, "Can't see this result. You have a sample ratio mismatch. Click to expose the results." And why we do we need that okay? We need that okay button because you want to be able to debug the reasons, and sometimes the metrics help you understand why you have a sample ratio mismatch.

Ronny Kohavi (01:00:00):
So we blanked out the scorecard, we had this button, and then we started to see that people pressed the button and still presented the results of experiments with sample ratio mismatch. And so we ended up with an amazing compromise, which is every number in the scorecard was highlighted with a red line, so that if you took a screenshot, other people could tell you how to sample ratio mismatch.

Lenny (01:00:24):
Freaking product managers.

Ronny Kohavi (01:00:26):
This is intuition. People just say, "Well, my [inaudible 01:00:30] was small, therefore I can still present the results." People want to see success. I mean, this is a natural bias, and then we have to be very conscientious and fight that bias and say when something looks too good to be true, investigate.

Lenny (01:00:45):
Which is a great segue to something you mentioned briefly, something called Twyman's law. Yeah. Can you talk about that?

Ronny Kohavi (01:00:51):
Yeah. So Twyman's law, the general statement is if any figure that looks interesting or different is usually wrong. It was first said by this person in the UK who worked in radio media, but I'm a big fan of it. And my main claim to people is if the result looks too good to be true, your normal movement of an experiment is under 1% and you suddenly have a 10% movement, hold the celebratory dinner. It was just your first reaction, right? Let's take everybody to a fancy dinner, because we just improved revenue by millions of dollars. Hold that dinner, investigate, see, because there's a large probability that something is wrong with the result. And I will say that nine out of 10, when we call it Twyman's law, it is the case that we find some flaw in the experiment.

Ronny Kohavi (01:01:45):
Now there are obviously outliers. That first experiment that I shared where we promoted that made long titles, that was successful. But that was replicated multiple times, and double and triple checked, and everything was good about it. Many other results that were so big turn out to be false. So I'm a big fan of Twyman's law. There's a deck, I could also give this in the note, where I shared some real examples of Twyman's law.

Lenny (01:02:14):
Amazing. I want to talk about rolling this out of companies and things that you run into that fail. But before I get to that, I'd love for you to explain P value. I know that people kind of misunderstand it, and this might be a good time to just help people understand, what is it actually telling you, P value of say 0.05?

Ronny Kohavi (01:02:30):
I don't know if this is the right forum for explaining P values, because the definition of a P value is simple. What it hides is very complicated. So I'll say one thing, which is many people assign one minus P value as the probability that your treatment is better than control. So you ran an experiment, you got a P value of 0.02. They think there's a 98% probability that the treatment is better than the control. That is wrong. So rather than defining P values, I want to caution everybody that the most common interpretation is incorrect.

Ronny Kohavi (01:03:08):
P value assumes, it's a conditional probability or an assumed probability. It assumes that the null hypothesis is true. And we're computing the probability that the data we're seeing matches the hypothesis, this null hypothesis.

Ronny Kohavi (01:03:27):
In order to get the probability that most people want, we need to apply Bayes' rules and invert the probability from the probability of the data given the hypothesis, to the probability of the hypothesis given the data. For that, we need an additional number, which is the probability, the prior probability that the hypothesis that you're testing is successful or not.

Ronny Kohavi (01:03:49):
That's an unknown. What we do is we can take historical data and say, "Look, people fail two thirds of the time or 80% of the time." And we can apply that number and compute that. We've done that in a paper that I will give in the notes, so that you can assess the number that you really want, what's called a false positive risk.

Ronny Kohavi (01:04:10):
So I think that's something for people to internalize, that what you really want to look at is this false positive risk, which tends to be much, much higher than the 5% that people think, right? So I think the classical example in the Airbnb where the failure rate was very, very high, is that when you get a statistically significant result, let me actually pull the note so that I know the actual number. If you're at Airbnb, or Airbnb search where the success rate is only 8%, if you get a statistically significant result with a P value less than 0.05, there is a 26% chance that this is a false positive result. It's not 5%, it's 26%.

Ronny Kohavi (01:04:54):
So that's the number that you should have in your mind. And that's why when I worked at Airbnb, one of the things we did is we said, "Okay, if you're less than 0.05, but above 0.01, rerun, replicate." When you replicate, you can combine the two experiments, and get a combined P value using something called Fisher's method or Stouffer's method, and that gives you the joint probability. And that's usually much, much lower. So if you get two 0.5's or something like that, then the probability that you've got them is much, much lower.

Lenny (01:05:26):
Wow, I've never heard it described that way. It makes me think about how even data scientists in our teams are always just like, "This isn't perfect. We're not 100% sure this experiment is positive." But on balance, if we're launching positive experiments, we're probably doing good things. It's okay if sometimes we're wrong.

Ronny Kohavi (01:05:42):
By the way, it's true. On balance, you're probably better than 50/50, but people don't appreciate how much that 26% that I mentioned is high. And the reason that I want to be sure is that I think it leads to this idea of the learning, the institutional knowledge. What you want to be able to say is share with the org's success. And so you want to be really sure that you're successful. So by lowering the P value, by forcing teams to work with the P value maybe below 0.01 and do replication on higher, then you can be much more successful, and the false positive rate will be much, much lower.

Lenny (01:06:20):
Fascinating. And also shows the value of keeping track of what percentage your experiments are failing historically at the company or within that specific product. Say someone listening wants to start running experiments, say they have tens of thousands of users at this point. What would be the first couple steps you'd recommend?

Ronny Kohavi (01:06:38):
Well, so if they have somebody in the org that has previously been involved with a experiment, that's a good way to consult internally. I think the key decision is whether you want to build or buy. There's a whole series of eight sessions that I posted on LinkedIn where I invited guest speakers to talk about this problem. So if people are interested, they can look at what the vendors say and what agency said about build versus buy question. And it's usually not a zero one, it's usually both. You build some and you buy some, and it's a question of do you build 10% or do you build in 90%?

Ronny Kohavi (01:07:17):
I think for people starting, the third party products that are available today are pretty good. This wasn't the case when I started working. So when I started running experiments at Amazon, we were building the platform because nothing existed. Same at Microsoft. I think today, there's enough vendors that provide good experimentation platforms that are trustworthy, that I would say not a good way to consider using one of those.

Lenny (01:07:44):
Say you're at a company where there's resistance to experimentation and A/B testing, whether it's a startup or a bigger company. What have you found works in helping shift that culture, and how long does that usually take, especially at a larger company?

Ronny Kohavi (01:07:57):
My general experience is with Microsoft, where we went with this beach head of Bing. We were running a few experiments and then we were asked to focus on Bing, and we scaled experimentation and built a platform at scale at Bing.

Ronny Kohavi (01:08:13):
Once Bing was successful and we were able to share all these surprising results, I think that many, many more people in the company were amenable. It was also the case that helped a lot that, there's a usual cross pollination. People from Bing move out to other groups, and that helped these other groups say, "Hey, there's a better way to build software."

Ronny Kohavi (01:08:34):
So I think if you're starting out, find a place, find a team where experimentation is easy to run. And by that, I mean they're launching often, right? Don't go with the team that launches every six months, or Office used to launch every three years. Go with the team that launches frequently. They're running on sprints, they launch every week or two. Sometimes they launch daily. I mean, Bing used to launch multiple times a day.

Ronny Kohavi (01:08:59):
And then make sure that you understand the question of the OEC. Is it clear what they're optimizing for? There are some groups where you can come up with a good OEC. Some groups are harder.

Ronny Kohavi (01:09:11):
I remember one funny example was the microsoft.com website, which this is not MSN, this is microsoft.com, has multiple different constituencies that are trying to determine this is a support site, and this is the ability to sell software through this site, and warn you about safety and updates. It has so many goals. I remember when the team said, "We want to run experiments," and I brought the group in and some of the managers and I said, "Do you know what you're optimizing for?"

Ronny Kohavi (01:09:47):
It was very funny because they surprised me. They said, "Hey Ronny, we read some of your papers. We know there's this term called OEC. We decided the time on site is our OEC." And I said, "Wait a minute. Some of your main goals is support site. Is people spending more time on the support site a good thing or a bad thing?" And then half the room thought that more time is better, and half the room thought that more time is worse. So an OEC is bad if directionally, you can't agree on it.

Lenny (01:10:18):
That's a great tip. Along these same lines, I know you're a big fan of platforms and building a platform to run experiments, versus just one-off experiments. Can you just talk briefly about that to give people a sense of where they probably should be going with their experimentation approach?

Ronny Kohavi (01:10:32):
Yeah, so I think the motivation is to bring the marginal cost of experiments down to zero. So the more you self-service, go to a website, set up your experiment, define your targets, define the metrics that you want, right? People don't appreciate that the number of metrics starts to grow really fast if you're doing things right. At Bing, you could define 10,000 metrics that you wanted to be in your scorecard. Big numbers.

Ronny Kohavi (01:11:02):
So it was so big, and people said it's computationally inefficient. We broke them into templates so that if you were launching a UI experiment, you would get this set of 2,000. If you were doing a revenue experiment, you would get this set of 2,000.

Ronny Kohavi (01:11:15):
So the point was build a platform that can quickly allow you to set up and run an experiment, and then analyze it. I think one of the things that I will say at Airbnb is the analysis was relatively weak, and so lots of data scientists were hired to be able to compensate for the fact that the platform didn't do enough.

Ronny Kohavi (01:11:36):
And this happens in other organizations too, where there's this trade-off. If you're building a good platform, invest in it so that more and more automation will allow people to look at the analysis, without the need to involve a data scientist.

Ronny Kohavi (01:11:53):
We published a paper. Again, I'll give it in the notes with this nice matrix of six axes, and how you move from crawl, to walk, to run, to fly, and what you need to build on those six axes. So one of the things that I do sometimes when I consult is I go into the org and say, "Where do you think you are on these six axes?" And that should be the guidance for what are the things you need to do next.

Lenny (01:12:21):
This is going to be the most epic show notes episode we've had yet. Maybe a last question. We talked about how important trust is to running experiments, and how even though people talk about speed, trust ends up being most important. Still, I want to ask you about speed. Is there anything you recommend for helping people run experiments faster and get results more quickly that they can implement?

Ronny Kohavi (01:12:40):
Yeah, so I'll say a couple of things. One is if your platform is good, then when the experiment finishes, you should have a scorecard soon after. Maybe takes a day, but it shouldn't be that you have to wait a week for the data scientist. To me, this is the number one way to speed up things.

Ronny Kohavi (01:13:00):
Now, in terms of using the data efficiently, there are mechanisms out there under the title of variance reduction that help you reduce the variance of metrics so that you need less users, so that you can get results faster. Some examples that you might think about are capping metrics. So if your revenue metric is very skewed, maybe you say, "Well, if somebody purchased over $1,000, let's make that $1,000." At Airbnb, one of the key metrics for example, is nights booked.

Ronny Kohavi (01:13:30):
Well, it turns out that some people book tens of nights. They're like an agency or something, hundreds of nights. You may say, "Okay, let's just cap this. It's unlikely that people book more than 30 days in a given month." So that various reduction technique will allow you to get statistically significant results faster.

Ronny Kohavi (01:13:53):
And a third technique is called cupid, which is an article that we published. Again, I can give it in the notes, which uses the pre-experiment data to adjust the result. And we can show that you get the result as unbiased, but with lower variance, and hence, it requires fewer users.

Lenny (01:14:11):
Ronny, is there anything else you want to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Ronny Kohavi (01:14:15):
No, I think we've asked a lot of good questions. Hope people enjoy this.

Lenny (01:14:20):
I know they will.

Ronny Kohavi (01:14:21):
Lightning round.

Lenny (01:14:22):
Lightning round. Here we go. I'm just going to roll right into it. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Ronny Kohavi (01:14:29):
There's a fun book called Calling Bullshit, which despite the name, which is a little extreme, I think, for a title, it actually has a lot of amazing insights that I love. And it sort of embodies, in my opinion, a lot of the Twyman's law showing that things that are too extreme, your bullshit meter should go up and say, "Hey, I don't believe that." So that's my number one recommendation.

Ronny Kohavi (01:14:57):
There's a slightly older book that I love called Hard Facts, Dangerous Half-Truths And Total Nonsense by the Stanford professors from the Graduate School of Business. Very interesting to see many of the things that we grew up with as well understood turn out to have no justification.

Ronny Kohavi (01:15:21):
So a stranger book, which I love, sort of on the verge of psychology, it's called Mistakes Were Made (But Not by Me), about all the fallacies that we fall into, and the humbling results from that.

Lenny (01:15:37):
The titles of these are hilarious, and there's a common theme across all these books. Next question, what is a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Ronny Kohavi (01:15:47):
So I recently saw a short series called Chernobyl, the disaster. I thought it was amazingly well done. Highly recommended it, based on true events. As usual, there's some freedom for the artistic movie. It was kind of interesting at the end, they say, "This woman in the movie wasn't really a woman. It was a bunch of 30 data scientists." Not data scientists, 30 scientists that in real life, presented all the data to the leadership of what to do.

Lenny (01:16:22):
I remember that. Fun fact, I was born in Odessa, Ukraine, which was not so far from Chernobyl. And I remember my dad told me he had to go to work. They called him into work that day to clean some stuff off the trees. I think ash from the explosion or something. It was far away where I don't think we were exposed, but we were in the vicinity. That's pretty scary. My wife, every time something's wrong with me, she's like, "That must be a Chernobyl thing." Okay, next question. Favorite interview question you like to ask people when you're interviewing them?

Ronny Kohavi (01:16:56):
So it depends on the interview, but when I do a technical interview, which I do less of, but one question that I love that it's amazing how many people it throws away for languages like C++, is tell me what the static qualifier does. And for multiple, you can do it for a variable, you can do it for function. And it is just amazing that I would say more than 50% of people that interview for engineering job cannot get this, and get it awfully wrong.

Lenny (01:17:31):
Definitely the most technical answer to this question yet.

Ronny Kohavi (01:17:34):
Very technical, yeah.

Ronny Kohavi (01:17:34):
I love it.

Lenny (01:17:36):
Okay. What's a favorite recent product you've discovered that you love?

Ronny Kohavi (01:17:39):
Blink cameras. So a Blink camera is this small camera. You stick in two AA batteries, and it lasts for about six months. They claim up to two years. My experience is usually about six months. But it was just amazing to me how you can throw these things around in the yard and see things that you would never know otherwise. Some animals that go by. We had a skunk that we couldn't figure out how he was entering, so I threw five cameras out and I saw where he came in.

Lenny (01:18:18):
Where'd he come in?

Ronny Kohavi (01:18:19):
He came in under a hole on the fence that was about this high. I have a video of this thing just squishing underneath. We never would've assumed that it came from there, from the neighbor. But yeah, these things have just changed. And when you're away on a trip, it's always nice to be able to say, "I can see my house. Everything's okay." At one point, we had a false alarm, and the cops came in and had this amazing video of how they're entering the house and pulling the guns out.

Lenny (01:18:56):
You got to share that on TikTok. That's good content. Wow. Okay. Blink cameras. We'll set those up in my house asap.

Ronny Kohavi (01:19:04):
Yes.

Lenny (01:19:06):
What is something relatively minor you've changed in the way your teams develop product, that has had a big impact on their ability to execute?

Ronny Kohavi (01:19:14):
I think this is something that I learned at Amazon, which is a structured narrative. So Amazon has some variance of this, which sometimes go by the name of a six pager or something. But when I was at Amazon, I still remember that email from Jeff, which is, "No more PowerPoint. I'm going to force you to write a narrative."

Ronny Kohavi (01:19:34):
I took that to heart. And many of the features that the team presented instead of a PowerPoint, you start off with a structured document that tells you what you need, the questions you need to answer for your idea. And then we review them as a team.

Ronny Kohavi (01:19:51):
And Amazon, these were paper-based. Now it's all based on Word or Google Docs where people comment, and I think the impact of that was amazing. I think the ability to give people honest feedback and have them appreciate, and have it stay after the meeting in these notes on the document, just amazing.

Lenny (01:20:13):
Final question, have you ever run an A/B test on your life, either your dating life, your family, your kids? And if so, what did you try?

Ronny Kohavi (01:20:21):
So there aren't enough units. Remember I said you need 10,000 of something to run true A/B tests? I will say a couple of things. One is I try to emphasize to my family, and friends, and everybody, this idea called the hierarchy of evidence. When you read something, there's a hierarchy of trust levels. If something is anecdotal, don't trust it. If there was an experiment, it was observational. Give it some bit of trust. As you get more up and up to a natural experiment, and controlled experiments, and multiple controlled experiments, your trust levels should go up. So I think that that's a very important thing that a lot of people miss when they see something in the news is, where does it come from?

Ronny Kohavi (01:21:06):
I have a talk that I've shared of all these observational studies that people made that were published. And then somehow, a control experiment was run later on and proved that it was directionally incorrect. So I think there's a lot to learn about this idea of the hierarchy of evidence, and share it with our family, and kids, and friends. I think there's a book that's based on this. It's like How to Read a Book.

Lenny (01:21:34):
Well, Ronny, the experiment of us recording a podcast I think is 100% positive P value 0.0. Thank you so much for being here.

Ronny Kohavi (01:21:44):
Thank you so much for inviting me and for great questions.

Lenny (01:21:47):
Amazing. I appreciate that. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, and is there anything that listeners can do for you?

Ronny Kohavi (01:21:55):
Finding me online is easy. It's LinkedIn. And what can people do for me? Understand the idea of control experiments as a mechanism to make the right data-driven decisions. Use science. Learn more by reading my book if you want. Again, all proceeds go to charity. And if you want to learn more, there's a class that I teach every quarter on Maven. We'll put in the notes how to find it, and some discount for people who managed to stay all the way to the end of this podcast.

Lenny (01:22:31):
Yeah, that's awesome. We'll include that at the top so people don't miss it, so there's going to be a code to get a discount on your course. Ronny, thank you again so much for being here. This was amazing.

Ronny Kohavi (01:22:39):
Thank you so much.

Lenny (01:22:40):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Sachin Monga (00:00:00):
I really think that we're just starting into this golden era of what it might mean to be a writer on the internet. The economic model for supporting great writing on the internet has been generally pretty terrible for the entirety of the internet's history. In the early days of Substack, there's a couple of these glimmers of hope where you'd have people like Matt Taibbi or Bill Bishop, some of the early writers on Substack that were really well established writers who were clearly just being undervalued and now could come to Substack and see their true value.

Sachin Monga (00:00:33):
And that was awesome. That was really cool to see. But in the last year or so, even in the last few months, I think there's been so many really interesting success stories now from writers who might not even consider themselves writers. People who are able to make a living, maybe even make a fortune just doing great work and not needing to have millions and millions of viewers or play the attention games of other networks, but just do really high quality work and have a relatively small number of people value it highly enough to pay for it.

Lenny (00:01:07):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny, and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. Today, my guest is Sachin Monga, who is currently the head of product at Substack. Before Substack, he had a startup called Cocoon that he sold to Substack. And before that, he spent over seven years at Facebook working on the video and camera products, building out the developer platform, and leading the ads growth team. In our conversation, we dig into all things Substack, what it's like to build product at Substack, how different it is to work at a startup versus a big company like Facebook, the future of the Substack product.

Lenny (00:01:42):
We also spent a lot of time on what I venture to say will go down in history as one of the most legendary growth features ever created, the Substack recommendations feature. Substack as a product and a company has changed my life and allowed me to do the work that I do now, and it was such a treat to be able to chat with Sachin. I hope that you find this conversation as interesting as I did. With that, I bring you Sachin Monga. Who has an opinion on internal tools? Internal tools are something you probably don't think about until you have to, or it probably didn't even occur to you to think about them.

Lenny (00:02:18):
But if you work at a big company, you probably have a bunch of one-off custom apps or dashboards that are laser focused on just one job to be done for one specific team or just one role, and they're always such a huge pain to build and maintain. And that's why I'm such a big fan of Retool and why I think Retool is so popular. Retool allows teams as small as just one person to build a suite of custom internal apps in a fraction of the time that you think it takes. The productivity gains of custom apps is now within reach, not just for large enterprises but for small teams as well. And as you scale, your company Retool scales with you.

Lenny (00:02:54):
Snowflake saves about 26 hours a week of manual spreadsheet work with custom internal apps built on Retool. Amazon uses Retool to handle GDPR requests. Thousands of teams at companies like Coinbase, DoorDash, and NBC collaborate around custom-built Retool apps to operate with greater efficiency. Maybe you've thought about using Retool before, but just haven't and I'm here to tell you that now teams of up to five can build unlimited Retool apps for free. Get started today at Retool.com/lenny. Do you want to reduce friction in your onboarding flow? Then let me tell you about Stytch, and that's Stytch with a Y.

Lenny (00:03:34):
Stytch is on a mission to eliminate friction from the internet. There's starting by making user authentication and onboarding more seamless and more secure. They offer super flexible out-of-the-box authentication solutions for companies of all sizes. From email magic links to SMS passcodes, one tap social logins to even biometrics, Stytch is your all-in-one platform for authentication. Stytch customers have been able to increase conversion by over 60% after spending just one day integrating. And with their API and SDKs, you can improve user conversion and retention and security all while saving valuable engineering time.

Lenny (00:04:13):
Your engineers will come and thank you for using Stytch, because Stytch keeps you from having to build authentication in house and the integration process is super fast and super smooth. To get $1,000 in free credits, just go to Stytch.com/lenny to sign up, and that's Stytch with a Y. Sachin, welcome to the podcast.

Sachin Monga (00:04:36):
Thanks for having me.

Lenny (00:04:37):
I'm actually really excited to have you on. I've told you this before, I've told the founders before, Substack has changed my life in so many ways. There's no way that I would be doing what I'm doing now if not for Substack and just like the magical combination of features that you all built. I'm also just really curious about how you all build the platform, where it's going, how it all works behind the scenes. Again, thank you for being here.

Sachin Monga (00:05:01):
I'm so happy to be here, and that's so great to hear.

Lenny (00:05:03):
Just to set a little context for folks, can you just talk about how you got to Substack? You're currently head of product at Substack. What was that journey to Substack?

Sachin Monga (00:05:12):
I joined Substack around a year ago now exactly through an acquisition. I'd started a company called Cocoon about three years prior to that with my good friend Alex Cornell. Cocoon is not like Substack. It was essentially a little photo sharing app for close friends and family, but there is a common thread which led us to Substack, which was prior to starting Cocoon, Alex and I had both worked at Facebook for a number of years and had worked on effectively the same problem of helping people share more with their friends and family and had all these ideas for what an idealized experience might look like.We just kept running into the wall that you run into when ultimately advertising is the business model that is powering this whole thing, and what that means is you need to accumulate a lot of time spent and attention and convert that into basically sellable eyeballs. But it's not that hard to imagine what a better solution would be. It's just that ads as the business model made it really hard to pull that off. Cocoon was in a lot of ways like a journey to explore what that might look like for this one particular use case of just helping you feel close to a handful of people.

Sachin Monga (00:06:14):
We always looked up to Substack as a really good example of basically that same principle, which is if you imagine rewiring the internet around paid subscriptions, direct subscriptions between, in Substack's case, readers and writers, what could that unlock and could it unlock a clearly better user experience? We looked at Substack as a real inspiration and an example of that really working out and got to know the founders pretty well and had a few conversations and realized that even though the blogging software and the photo sharing app are pretty different, our underlying motivations were really consistent.

Sachin Monga (00:06:46):
It was a bit of a match made in heaven and the whole team joined Substack a year ago. I've been privileged enough to get to lead the product and design teams, and it's been a blast so far.

Lenny (00:06:57):
Before your startup, you're at Facebook for a number of years, is that right?

Sachin Monga (00:07:00):
Yes. I started in 2011 there on the growth team and had the chance to work on a bunch of different teams there, growth, platform, ads, and then eventually the team we called Sharing, which was helping people share more in the main Facebook app.

Lenny (00:07:12):
Sweet. I want to spend a little time on that, but coming back to Substack, I'm curious just how the product team runs. How many PMs do y'all have? How is it structured? How are you thinking it'll evolve as you scale? What can you share there?

Sachin Monga (00:07:25):
Sure. Maybe to start from when I started at Substack, we had zero PMs. We had a handful of designers. We had maybe 15 or so engineers. I think we're coming to the close of this kind of one-time inflection point of becoming a product driven company and having a product process and structure and PMs and full stack product teams. When I started at Substack, there was really not much of this. We're still pretty early, but we have something going now.

Sachin Monga (00:07:51):
We have four product managers in addition to myself, and we have three essentially kind of full stack product teams now that have a PM and an engineering manager, a data person or a designer, engineers and things are starting to roll. We're finally emerging from this transition phase and it's been super fun.

Lenny (00:08:10):
What are these three teams?

Sachin Monga (00:08:11):
The three teams are: we have a writer team that serves writers, we have a reader team that serves readers, and we have a growth team that does growthy things. I should mention, we have a fourth engineering team that's like the systems team that doesn't have a product manager on it, but is keeping the lights on and helping us scale.

Lenny (00:08:28):
Awesome. That makes sense. You currently align it around the type of user plus the platform stuff. Do you have a sense of where this might evolve over the next few years just structure wise? Do you think it'll stick to that? Do you have a plan of how this might radically shift as you grow?

Sachin Monga (00:08:43):
Yeah. I'm actually kind of shocked that it's lasted this long and stayed consistent. I remember at Facebook, we would change our team structure what felt like every three months or six months and just have a reorg every once in a while. Part of why I think it's remained pretty consistent is exactly what you mentioned, which is the teams aren't oriented around product surfaces. We don't have a team that's like the app team or a team that's like the dashboard team or the podcasting team. We have teams that are oriented around customers and solving bit of a timeless customer problem. We'll never be done serving writers.

Sachin Monga (00:09:16):
We just started honestly having a concerted focus on serving readers. Growth is never a problem that you check the box off on. I hope that we are able to maintain this general structure. I think as Substack grows and expands, I'm sure we'll have more than three teams. This is where we're at right now, but I really like the focus on a customer and a timeless mission really rather than orienting around what might be a bit more of an ephemeral surface area or product de jour.

Lenny (00:09:46):
Awesome. Shout out to the writer team. Thanks for building all the awesome stuff that I get to use. It makes sense why you are more recently investing in the reader team because Substack has this magical advantage platforms have where your supply drives all your demand. I go out and promote my newsletter, people sign up for Substack. It makes sense why there's not initially a huge focus on the demand growth, but makes sense to get there. It sounds like your app is awesome.

Lenny (00:10:11):
One thing I wanted to touch on is you're kind of in this interesting position as a head of product at a small-ish company with a founder who's very product sense strong, and that's a classic challenge for a product leader to be in, where it's a smallish company, either a first PM or even a head of product, where the founder's very opinionated about the product. I'm curious what you've learned about how to work in that environment as a PM.

Sachin Monga (00:10:36):
That's a great question. I don't know if I have the recipe for this, but I can just maybe share a few of the things that come to mind. I think the first thing was really treating my role in the beginning more as a facilitator than a decision maker when it comes to product. I think the team was also small enough that everyone in theory could have a good sense of what everyone else was up to. A specific problem we had I think when I joined was that we were just getting to the point where we wouldn't have one weekly meeting where Chris could be in the room, Chris is the CEO of Substack and the person you're mentioning, and decide what we're doing in the next two weeks.

Sachin Monga (00:11:13):
We were just emerging from that phase. We had this problem which was all of a sudden, Chris didn't really know what all the teams were doing and the teams didn't really know what Chris had in mind for what they should do and what the vision was. We were hiring really quickly and hiring people who might not have all of the context of being in the room with him for years and being in all of the all-hands meetings. When I first joined, I felt like my main role was actually just solving that. And if nothing else, if Chris could have a really good sense of what all the teams are doing and if the teams knew where he was coming from and could start to get better at modeling him and his vision, that would be a win.

Sachin Monga (00:11:43):
For the first couple months I'd say, that was all I tried to do. I think now Chris and I have some reps under our belt and the teams have some reps under their belts too, and that trust just starts to form. We start the week, Chris and I, we sit down for an hour. We go through what do we feel like are the big problems to focus on this week, what are the things we're worried about. We sit down at the end of the week and we check in again. There's just a lot of open communication. I think that helps a lot.

Lenny (00:12:07):
Got it. It sounds like the core of this is building trust, which makes sense. The way that you've been building trust, one is just do it again and again and then Chris starts to trust, "Okay, Sachin's going to do the things that I think are probably the right things." And then you said you have this weekly meeting. Is there anything else that either tactically you find as a really important component of this relationship or any other lessons you've learned about just how to keep this relationship healthy and constructive?

Sachin Monga (00:12:34):
One thing that I think about a little bit because like any startup, there's going to be times that are really difficult, times that are really fun. Substack is certainly going through this really transformative time, but we're really evolving in a lot of ways from a tool into a network. We're in the thick of seeing this vision through in a lot of ways Chris has had in his mind for five years. We did a thing at an all-hands a little while ago where Substack went through Y Combinator I think it was maybe now six years ago and we watched the 60 second demo they pitched from 2017.

Sachin Monga (00:13:04):
What was so cool about that was we're actually doing all those things now that Chris got up on stage and talked about like, "One day in the future, Substack is going to get into podcasting, and we're going to have this network effect that helps writers grow by virtue of there being other writers in the platform." There's all these things that we kind of couldn't do until we earned our place at the table and the right to be able to do those things that we're doing now. To go back to your question, I think a thing that I really try to be mindful of right now is, how do I catch up?

Sachin Monga (00:13:35):
Chris has been thinking about this problem for five times as long as I have. If I can get a good sense of where his vision starts from and catch up those few years and help the teams do the same, that'll go a long way. Because at the same time, everyone now is coming at it from a different perspective. We've a lot more data and evidence. It's really good to have people on the team that have come from other companies and comply that perspective. It's a lot of, again, facilitation and I view that as a big part of my role.

Lenny (00:14:01):
Awesome. I'm curious, what are the biggest challenges with being in the position you're in? Are there any examples of a man that sucked? Or if you want to go in a different direction, is there a certain type of person that just isn't a good fit for this kind of role, had a product at a smallish company with a very product minded founder?

Sachin Monga (00:14:19):
Oh, let's start with the first one. I think the biggest challenge with this role/company phase, like I mentioned, we're going through this one-time transition from not really having a product function or a product process to having one, is almost by definition any time you figure out how to do a thing, you'll now reach this next phase of growth and it'll be obsolete. Something that I've repeated a bunch of the teams is I'm never too worried if we have the perfect planning process or the perfect execution cadence or the perfect communication process, whatever our process is, we're never going to have a perfect one.

Sachin Monga (00:14:52):
And even if we did, it would soon be obsolete because we did a really good job and now we've grown 2X or something and we have more people and the process needs to change. The main thing I care about is are we just getting better every week, every month, certainly every year. I think that's easier said than done. It sounds good in theory, but then when you're in the thick of it. you're constantly basically feeling like you don't know how to do the thing. Because as soon as you figure it out, it's obsolete. It's just really hard. I think that's true of basically just startups in general, high growth companies. Doing the thing well means that you're not going to know what you're doing.

Sachin Monga (00:15:24):
Maybe that leads into my answer to the second question, which is that's not really for everyone. I think there's almost like a personality type that has to be okay with being humbled all the time and feeling like you don't know what you're doing. I think you could be an amazing product manager at a company that is a bit more stable and consistent and get really good at what you're doing and someone who's going to be really good at a company that is on a bit of this trajectory, for folks who aren't watching the video, making a motion with my hand, that's not growing too fast, it's kind of a different job. The rate of change is a huge factor.

Lenny (00:16:03):
The point you made about how things are going to keep changing as you grow is such an important point that I don't feel like comes up as much as I thought would come up on this podcast. People are always asking me for advice. How do I structure my product team? How do I prioritize? How do I do planning? The main thing I've learned is no matter what you end up with, it's going to change in three to six months anyway because you'll learn more. The advice is just do the best thing you can think of right now. Don't assume this will last anyway, and that's good enough. There's never the perfect way to do it. It's always the best way you could do it at this moment, and then you learn how to evolve it.

Sachin Monga (00:16:35):
100% agree.

Lenny (00:16:37):
You worked at Facebook for I think it was seven years. I'm curious what were you able to take from that experience about how Facebook, in a massive company like that, builds product to a smaller company like Substack. What translates well and then what just doesn't?

Sachin Monga (00:16:51):
Over time, I'm finding that less translates than I thought. I don't know how much of that has to do with Facebook specifically though. I'll maybe mention one thing. Working on the core Facebook app, which was what I was working on for the bulk of my time there, Facebook may be the most extreme example of trying to solve so many different problems for so many different people in one tiny rectangle basically, that a big part of the product manager's job in a situation like that is going to be managing trade-offs. It's a super fascinating intellectual problem.

Sachin Monga (00:17:22):
I think going back to the previous point, a lot of people really thrive in that kind of environment, where if we do this thing really well, it is going to directly trade-off against doing this other thing. It's not even a sequencing thing. When you think about prioritization, sometimes you think, we will do this, and then we'll do this, and then we'll do this. In Facebook's case, sometimes it's, "Oh, if we do this, we just can't do this. It's going to be bad for this other thing. If we put a watch tab at the bottom, will that mean that people don't get a marketplace tab? What does that mean for this whole org and what the product is?" I think when it comes to something like prioritization, it's a very different ballgame.

Sachin Monga (00:17:56):
There's certainly some things that are consistent. You generally want to prioritize things that are going to be high impact, low effort. These types of product management frameworks, I think a lot of it can hold constant. But when you really get into the object level like what does your day look like, I think being a PM at a high growth... I can't generalize this, but the job at Substack right now, it looks quite different than what I recognized as my job from Facebook circa 2018. I think it's maybe even gotten more the case that the PM's job in a situation like that will be navigating these types of internal trade-offs. I think on something like prioritization, very different.

Lenny (00:18:31):
Just to double click on that a little bit, the main difference you're saying is that at a Facebook, it's not like whether we do a thing, it's just like what comes first, second, third. At a Substack, it's like we probably won't get to this for a year if we don't prioritize it now. Is that how you think about it, just like the time scale on your trade-offs?

Sachin Monga (00:18:46):
No. I think actually at Facebook, it's not necessarily whether we do a thing. It's not like we do this now or we do this later. It's doing this thing might mean we can't do this other thing at all, or it'll mean that instead of that chart being steady until we make the number go up, it might go down. By doing A, it might mean B is harder to do forever. Whereas at a startup, a lot of it is time. Time is the main variable. We can do this now and that means that we can't do this other thing until later. There's also an element of sequencing that matters I think a lot at a company like Substack that is in this formative stage of becoming an entirely new thing in a lot of ways.

Sachin Monga (00:19:21):
Substack started off like a single player tool for writers. It was like software for writers. If you describe Substack now as simply a newsletter tool, that would be reductive. It's really now much more of this ecosystem that's evolving in all sorts of interesting ways. There is a bit of an order of operations at play here where doing something right now might unlock our ability to do something later. That matters a lot in a situation like we're in at Substack.

Lenny (00:19:49):
Got it. Essentially there's a lot more one-way doors at a larger company. Here, you can make decisions more quickly partly, but also you can go back and there's not all these second order effects of decision you're making.

Sachin Monga (00:20:00):
I think that's right, or at least there are different types of second order effects.

Lenny (00:20:03):
Got it. I know at Substack writers are like the beacon and the vision of making writers successful, helping people make a living writing. I imagine writers are the North Star or helping writers be successful, but is there anything where you can share about how you prioritize things that you work on within Substack? How do you think about the North Star?

Sachin Monga (00:20:20):
Going back to your question about Chris too, I think Chris and Hamish and Jay, the founders I think really start from a place of principle in a lot of ways. Why are we even doing this thing? It's not just to help writers make money. It's not just to unlock these cool things. It starts with an opinion for how the internet should work, where people should be in control over their destiny to a much greater extent than has ever really been the case over at least the last 10, 15 years, where all of a sudden, everyone just started spending all of their time in a handful of these public squares that were powered by ads.

Sachin Monga (00:20:57):
When you think about what that means for Substack right now, that that means writers are in control over being able to deliver their best work on their terms to their audience, make money directly from their subscribers, and also that readers should be in control over their experience. When you show up to Substack.com, that experience should be something that you have a much greater degree of agency over or if you download the app than if you maybe opened up TikTok or something.

Sachin Monga (00:21:20):
I think where that leads you down from a prioritization standpoint is often starting from, okay, if we could do something in a bunch of different ways, is there a way that provides more control to the writer or more control over the experience that the reader has to them? Is there a way that provides much less control? All things equal, do the one that holds constant this principle of control. We could talk about a few other examples like this, but I think from a prioritization standpoint and from a strategic standpoint, Substack is a pretty principled company, and I think it's been really fun and interesting to get to work in an environment like this and also see how it actually can work.

Sachin Monga (00:21:57):
You are excited about recommendations, the recommendations feature, and we can talk about that in more detail. I think that's a good example where there's certainly a way to do that where writers have the max amount of control. We picked that way even if it might seem harder to pull off. And then that feedback loop of, "Oh, that actually worked," is really awesome to get to experience.

Lenny (00:22:17):
Yes, I definitely wanted to talk about this recommendation feature. I feel like it's maybe the most underappreciated radical shift in Substack and just platforms in general. I think this is going to go down as one of the most legendary impactful features of any platform or marketplace. I'm just putting this out there. It's such a huge deal and I don't think people appreciate this. Just to quickly summarize what this is, essentially you allowed writers like me to recommend other newsletters that I specifically pick. I pick 10 newsletters that I think are awesome. Once someone subscribes to my newsletter, they see these 10 as, "Hey, you should check these out. I think these are awesome."

Lenny (00:22:55):
It's very curated. There's no algorithm involved, which to your point is Substack's I think vision and mission is just avoid algorithms as much as possible. The reason I think this is crazy and amazing is at this point, 70% of my growth is coming from this one feature. There's something like 500 other newsletters recommending me. As soon as the feature launched and you look at my growth chart, it's just a hockey stick starting that day. I don't think people appreciate this enough, and I'm really excited to just chat about how this feature came to be.

Lenny (00:23:26):
Coming back to a point we talked about earlier of Chris having a very strong opinion about how to build product, something I heard through a birdie is that Chris was not excited about this feature when it was proposed and it took a bit of pushing to get it out. Maybe we start there. How did this come to be?

Sachin Monga (00:23:39):
Sure. The way it came to be was that we noticed this organic behavior emerging, which was that a lot of readers of Substacks were starting to discover Substacks, but the way that was happening was typically through the lens of that original writer. This could happen in a bunch of different ways, right? I think you've used the guest post feature to have guests write post on your newsletter. Obviously that is a really good way for your readers to go and discover some of these other writers in a way that you're curating. There's some less obvious ways that this happens too.

Sachin Monga (00:24:10):
If you have comments on, which I think you do, if I scroll down and click on the profile of someone who's commenting on your post, it'll show me the other Substack that person reads too. Again, this is a very personalized and very writer centric way of doing discovery. At the same time, we talked about the supply and demand side of the marketplace. The supply side of Substack has just grown over time consistently to the point where now there's a huge amount of amazing writers on the platform and a huge number of collective readers on the platform too that we knew that this sort of like cross-pollination, this discovery loop could be a really powerful thing.

Sachin Monga (00:24:47):
If you'd start from the first principles, you're like, "All right, how do we help readers discover more things?' The most obvious way to do this would be something like, "Here are some Substacks you might. Based on what we know about your reading habits, here's like a few that Substack is just going to recommend you." This is the thing that worked really well. At Facebook in particular, I think when I joined in 2011, it was definitely still during the era... I think Facebook maybe had just over 500 million users and was on this path to a billion and beyond.

Sachin Monga (00:25:13):
This thing that we called PYMK, which was People You May Know, this little unit that would show up in the newsfeed and it would just tell you that eight other people that you obviously know because you have million mutual friends. That kind of thing drove a very non-trivial amount of Facebook growth in the early days. Of course, lots of other products have done things like this. We could have done something like that.

Sachin Monga (00:25:32):
But then going back to that principle of like, okay, well, if we were to do that, let's say we were to insert it at the bottom of our post or in an email or something, it's clearly a thing now where the writer who owns that space is not really in control over what the experiences that they're offering their readers. The reader who signed up for Lenny is now seeing these other things that have nothing to do with Lenny. Does that break this control principle, like putting writers in charge, putting readers in charge? Okay, so then back to the drawing board, what would be the most obvious maximal way to just put writers in control? What is the simplest version of this?

Sachin Monga (00:26:05):
What if we just ask writers, who do you recommend? What if we just put that in the subscribe flow and just made it as simple as possible? I think Chris' reaction to that originally when that idea came up was that's probably just going to be really hard to pull off. There's a lot more things that have to be true. You need writers to opt in. You need to pick good people. You need to find a way to surface those recommendations to the readers in a way that's going to generate a good amount of surface area. I think it was a bit of skepticism that something like that could work, but we tried it and it took off really quickly.

Sachin Monga (00:26:39):
There was this virality at play now where when you recommend a bunch of people, those people will get an email that say, "Hey, Lenny's recommending you and here's all the readers that he's sending you." It created this goodwill viral loop, which was really interesting to see play out. I think there was a bunch of interesting lessons in there. We could stick into anything that seems interesting, but I think Chris' skepticism was not, should we do cross-pollination discovery? Clearly this is something that's working, but is this kind of thing going to work given how many steps are required for it to be true that this becomes really impactful? It turned out that it took off way faster than I think we had imagined.

Lenny (00:27:13):
Is there any stats you can share about just the impact it's having, what it's done to Substack?

Sachin Monga (00:27:17):
Yeah, sure. Recommendations specifically now have driven in the millions of new subscriptions for writers across the board, across I think like tens of thousands of unique writers that have received subscriptions from the recommendations feature. Of course, recommendations in particular are still just one component in this broader basket of network driven discovery.

Sachin Monga (00:27:39):
I think we recently shared the stat, more than one in three new subscriptions across Substack are coming from the Substack network and around one in 10 paid subscriptions now too. But these numbers are just, as you can imagine, growing up and to the right, getting stronger every day, and I think we'll have some more interesting stats to share on that soon.

Lenny (00:27:58):
Awesome. One thing I wanted to acknowledge, I think some people worry about this feature that it drives lower intent users. I find that not to be true. They're definitely lower intent, but it's not meaningfully and significantly. The fact that 70% of my user growth comes from this feature and my open rates have only come down a little bit, it says a lot about it. It's like useful really in tenfold people as much as it can be from someone that hasn't actually been planning to subscribe and just recently found out about it. It's really impressive how high intent they are all things considered.

Sachin Monga (00:28:31):
You bring up a point too that leads into some of the next things we're thinking about here, which is that right now most of the subscriptions that come from recommendations are coming from one particular flow in the product, which is when someone subscribes to someone else on Substack, they will then see a recommendation for Lenny. It's being serviced to people at a moment where not only are they just hearing about you for the first time, but they might just be hearing about the recommending writer for the first time too. They are new subscribers. They don't have this long standing trusted relationship built up yet.

Sachin Monga (00:29:04):
Of course, you have people now who've been subscribing to you for years and who trust you greatly and would probably take your recommendation very seriously, but the people that you're recommending are only getting these subscribers at the first moment that someone finds out about Lenny in many cases. A big part of the next step of this product now is thinking about recommendations less as a step of the flow and more like a really interesting social graph that is being built of goodwill and of influence. You now recommend a bunch of other writers. There's much more that could be done in the network than just show some of those writers in the subscribe flow of lennysnewsletter.com.

Sachin Monga (00:29:43):
There's a lot more we could do there. I'm curious if you have any ideas, but we've got a bunch of ideas that we're cooking up that I think will not only drive more subscriptions, but also probably higher intent ones as well, because these are going to be people that might already have been reading you for years who never right now would know who you're recommending.

Lenny (00:29:58):
No great ideas to share. I do find since it's only free subscribers, I have to do more work to upsell them to try paid. On the other hand, having a huge pool of interested people that aren't ready to convert yet is only beneficial. When I send a free post and mention, "Hey, I have a paid subscription. You can get more," it works really well.

Lenny (00:30:17):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals, or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table.

Lenny (00:30:56):
Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious, and expensive. Enter Vanta. Over 3,000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

Lenny (00:31:34):
Something else I'll mention that I've learned to do is I feel so fortunate being early on Substack and having this thing grow so much, especially from this recommendation feature that I'm actually getting pings from people regularly now of, "Hey, can you recommend my newsletter?" It's like a really good growth hack on Substack right now to try to get a lot of subscribers to recommend you. My system right now is I want to share the wealth as much as I can, so I rotate through different newsletters.

Lenny (00:31:59):
I help get them say a thousand subscribers, and then move on to the next one, assuming I like them. It's not just any random user. So I can share the wealth with a lot of different newsletters and give people a platform, because I have this platform now and that's been working really well.

Sachin Monga (00:32:12):
The Robin Hood of Substack.

Lenny (00:32:14):
Yeah, now I'm going to get all these DMs to recommend people. If I'm unable to, I'm sorry. You talked about how Chris was worried that this would not work. That's interesting. His point of there's so many steps that have to happen for this to be adopted is such a good one. In my experience, getting users to do anything is so hard. To get them to click some buttons and fill things out, that rarely works. It's cool that it really did work.

Lenny (00:32:38):
I think it was part of the early beta, and I found that it was a really thoughtful approach to how it was all rolled out where there was a small group of users and writers that tried it out, see how went, see what the impact was, see if there was any negative impact. Is there anything you could share by just the way this was rolled out that you've learned about how to do this sort of thing?

Sachin Monga (00:32:56):
I mentioned that we're going through this one-time transition of figuring out how to become a product driven company and how to ship products faster, better, et cetera. One of the principles I guess in this playbook that we're trying to write is we call it build with writers, build with readers. In some ways now that I think about it, it's almost like a sub principle of the put readers in charge, put writers in charge. How do you build product responsibly if you care deeply about that? One way to do it would be to almost as a strong default, anytime we're going to make a fundamental change to how Substack works, do it in a way where we bring writers along.

Sachin Monga (00:33:32):
This is still an optional thing. This isn't changing how Substack works for everyone, but this is we think a potentially profound enough thing that the way we did this was not just roll it out for everyone, put a little dialogue in the dashboard that says, "Hey, everyone, now go do this thing," it was like, okay, why don't we call up 10 writers who we think might be interested in this." It's not that hard to just mock up what this could look like, get some feedback. This is the kind of thing that I think a lot of product teams would do. But then maybe a lot of product teams would be like, "Okay, we got good feedback. Let's just build the thing, ship the thing."

Sachin Monga (00:33:59):
Instead, we just ran a little pilot. You and a few other writers were gracious enough to lend your time and talk us through how you would see this working and what you would want. We actually have now we've set up something called the Product Lab, which I'm really excited about. I think you're a part of it. I hope we asked you.

Lenny (00:34:16):
I'm curious to see where this all goes.

Sachin Monga (00:34:19):
This is just an invite only little group of a hundred or so writers that we know are interested in being on the bleeding edge of what Substack is becoming. We're investing a lot in just tools to help writers grow. Now we've got this little lab where we can take a feature recommendations to writers and get quick feedback and ensure that we're never just rolling something out to everyone without going through this step first. It's just been super helpful to have a bit of this infrastructure in place. Often the thing that we end up shipping on day one tends to be pretty different from what we had in mind before we went through this process.

Lenny (00:34:54):
I've been through a bunch of those experiences and it always goes super well. I've been through a few features that just didn't go anywhere and then they, "Nope, we're going to move on and not try this thing." Something else that always comes to mind with Substack is it's often in the news. Substack is a very popular topic amongst reporters.

Sachin Monga (00:35:10):
Writers like to talk about writers.

Lenny (00:35:11):
That's right, especially a platform that might disrupt them someday or friends have gone on and they're maybe jealous about. I'm curious, as a product leader, how you deal with bad press, angry attention, things like that, just keeping people focused, keeping people motivated. Do you discuss stuff? How do you approach stuff that comes out of like, "Oh man," and keep people excited?

Sachin Monga (00:35:33):
The whole thing here is just parsing out the signal from the noise. There's very little chatter in the blogosphere media sphere that would actually impact our day-to-day when I think about it. It's not zero, right? Sometimes there'll be something that ends up blowing up or that people are talking about that we should really take seriously and see how that might impact our strategy. But I'd say 90% of the chatter about Substack is going to probably ultimately just be a distraction to our product team at the end of the day that should just be focused on executing on the vision.

Sachin Monga (00:36:02):
Maybe my skin got thickened from working at Facebook during a bunch of years that... Actually when I started at Facebook, generally things were quite rosy in the press, but we certainly went through a bunch of different phases and a lot of the stuff. I worked on myself that Facebook ended up getting talked about a ton in the press negatively most of the time. You just learn to just keep your heads down and keep shipping. Ultimately, that's all that matters. I feel proud of the way that I think our culture is internally being formed right now. We tend to not get distracted.

Lenny (00:36:37):
It seems to be the case. I'm curious where you see Substack going as a product long-term. What are you excited about? Where are things heading?

Sachin Monga (00:36:45):
Maybe I'll answer that in two parts, one from a writer centric lens and one from a reader centric lens, which I mentioned is a bit of a newer thing for us. From a writer centric lens, I really think that we're just starting into this golden era of what it might mean to be a writer on the internet. Like I mentioned before, the economic model for supporting great writing on the internet has been generally pretty terrible for the entirety of the internet's history.

Sachin Monga (00:37:13):
In the early days of Substack, there's a couple of these glimmers of hope where you'd have people like Matt Taibbi or Bill Bishop, some of the early writers on Substack that were really well established writers who were clearly just being undervalued and now could come to Substack and see their true value. That was awesome. That was really cool to see. But in the last year or so, even in the last few months, I think there's been so many really interesting success stories now from writers who might not even consider themselves writers, let alone well established writers like Matt Taibbi or someone like that.

Sachin Monga (00:37:46):
People who are able to make a living, maybe even make a fortune just doing great work and not needing to have millions and millions of viewers or play the attention games of other networks, but just do really high quality work and have a relatively small number of people value it highly enough to pay for it. That's like a new thing. When I see the next one to two years play out for the writer side of the equation, a lot of what we're going to try to do is just make it much simpler to get started, to have your Substack.

Sachin Monga (00:38:15):
If you have an audience anywhere, Substack's never going to be the place where have the biggest audience probably, but it certainly should be the place where your most valuable audience comes home to, where they get your best work. We're seeing a lot of really interesting success stories now of people that might have a big Instagram following or YouTube following and certainly Twitter following were able to use Substack now as this home base, this place to try to accumulate their most valuable audience that they own in the sense that they get their email address, they can export them at any time, and just build really simple tools to just help them deliver their best work.

Sachin Monga (00:38:47):
It could be writing, could be a podcast, could be video. We're investing a lot in some really interesting community features as well. You're a great example of this. To call Lenny's Newsletter simply a newsletter would be hilariously wrong at this point, right? I think you mentioned to me you had 30 meetups around the world last month or something like that.

Lenny (00:39:03):
That's right.

Sachin Monga (00:39:04):
It's an impressive of run rate of meetups. I think seeing that unfold and seeing how the platform can support that type of community behavior as well is a big thing that I'm excited about. Just more. On the reader's side, I think maybe to segue into that, I think we're again entering this little potential golden age of the internet for how you experience it as a consumer. Where instead of just having a handful of feeds that are basically the same, that you could just scroll through and consume videos of random people doing random things. Not to say that's bad and that should go away.

Sachin Monga (00:39:37):
I do my fair share of just scrolling through my phone and watching random videos too, but it'd be kind of nice to have another place you could go to as well where the best culture is being made and you have an extreme degree of control over what you see and who you choose to lead into that space. You might not spend two hours a day in there, and that's fine, but it might be the first place you go because it's where all the best stuff is and it's where your best communities are going to live too. We kind of see Substack evolving not as some new type of social media, but true alternative to how you might spend that most valuable slice of your time.

Sachin Monga (00:40:13):
We just launched an iPhone app, I guess now it's been six months ago, and it's going really well. We're going to launch an Android app very shortly. We're pushing really hard on this reader experience as well. I think it'll be radically different and much better one or two years from now too.

Lenny (00:40:28):
It's been interesting to see a growing percentage of the great content that I come across be on Substack, and so I think that's a cool trend for y'all. For writers that are thinking about starting a newsletter, thinking about joining Substack, what sorts of advice, tips, guidance do you have for folks that are thinking about getting into the Substack world?

Sachin Monga (00:40:50):
My first piece of advice would be to just start it and see what happens. Start it. Have a way to start gathering subscribers. Put a link to it somewhere. Write one or two things. If you're not much of a writer, try posting a video, recording some audio, turn into a little podcast. Just start basically and see what happens and see what kind of interest there might be out there for what you have to say, especially if you already have a following on other platforms as well.

Sachin Monga (00:41:17):
I think that there's a real risk that if your entire following is locked into one platform where you don't have a ton of control over, your ability to reach those people deterministically and certainly to monetize that in some way, it seems like it's a tenuous place to be in the current age of the internet. I'd say just start. It should be really easy. Go to Substack.com, press the start your Substack button, and see what happens.

Lenny (00:41:41):
That advice may sound to people like, "Oh yeah, that's not actual advice." But I will say that is exactly what I did and that's exactly how I got to what I do now. I had zero intention of ever doing this. Charging for writing that I'm writing, that's crazy. Just the fact that Substack existed and let me try stuff out for free. You sign up. You start it. My newsletter, it's called Lenny's Newsletter because that was like the default recommendation when I signed up, because I told them my name's Lenny and it's like Lenny's Newsletter, because I had no plan to do this. It was just like, let me just sign up and try blogging here for a little bit and that little path.

Lenny (00:42:21):
I think about Chris and Hamish and the founders mapping out a user journey of a vision of how somebody onboards to Substack, to go from never writing to doing it full-time. I feel like I went through that exactly, if they even had that, where I sign up just to try it out. I start writing consistently. It starts going well, then I think about charging, and then I launch the paid plan, and then that goes well. It keeps growing, and then I do it full-time. That's exactly what I went down and there's no world where I would've done this if not for those magical combination of features of just a really simple blog a d newsletter and collecting emails and maybe monetizing down the road.

Sachin Monga (00:43:01):
Yeah, that's amazing to hear.

Lenny (00:43:03):
I think that just start advice is really spot on. Just try it out, see if it's something you want to do. I will say, it's easy to start a newsletter, it's hard to continue a newsletter. The continuing is the most important part, as Seinfeld would say in that clip, who rings the bell.

Sachin Monga (00:43:17):
I will say though to that point too that I'm really excited for what Substack can do in the product to make that easier in a way that doesn't cheapen the experience. There's a bunch of things we could do to. We could automatically post stuff to your readers. We could do a lot of things. Going back to the how do we do discovery, there's a bunch of things that would probably just work, but they would eventually kill what Substack is or have all these nasty second order effects and ruin this promise of putting writers in charge, putting readers in charge.

Sachin Monga (00:43:45):
I'm really excited and I actually view your Substack as a vanguard, as a very leading edge example of this, of you have turned your Substack into not just this thriving community of readers, but also of contributors and creators. You've got these amazing people coming and doing guest posts. You've got the podcast going. You've got these meetups. You've I think in a lot of ways alleviated the burden of how hard it would be to just be writing a long form thing every day and doing that for the rest of your life. That would be really hard. That would make it certainly much harder to keep going.

Sachin Monga (00:44:19):
Not to say that it's easy now, I know how hard it is to do what you do. But I think Substack can do more to turn this ecosystem to funnel this energy into ways for people like you to feel more like a leader of a space and a curator in a lot of ways and still deliver this really valuable service to your audience without having to do all the work yourself. I think we can do a lot more to support that kind of thing.

Lenny (00:44:45):
Is there anything you could share about what sorts of things you're thinking there and what might be possible?

Sachin Monga (00:44:49):
Let's see. Guest posts are working really well, and I'll say that we have a bunch of ideas for how to make guest posts a much bigger thing. Right now, the way guest posts work, kind of like an op-ed or something, like you invite someone to come and just write a post on your Substack. I think there's much more we can do without getting into some of the specifics and scooping the product team that we're working on that I think could make it feel more like you've got a bunch of people who are somewhat more fluidly able to contribute to your Substack and deliver value to your audience.

Sachin Monga (00:45:18):
I've teased this community stuff that we're working on a little bit, but we're piloting a feature right now that's been working really well where writers can get a little bit of like a... We view it as the pub at the back of your Substack where people can hang out and chat and the writer is still in control and sets the tone and sets the rules and norms for the space, but can create space for their subscribers to participate and hang out themselves too. Those are two areas that we're investing in a fair bit right now.

Lenny (00:45:45):
Something that I imagine somebody suggested that I'd suggest you all look into a little bit is open AI assisted writing. I was playing with this product that is called Jasper and there's also Copy.ai. I put in the title of the post I was about to write and it just generated a pretty good paragraph summary of what it could have been. They have this whole feature where you just start typing and it autocompletes things smartly.

Sachin Monga (00:46:11):
That's crazy.

Lenny (00:46:11):
That would be cool. I don't know if you want to go there, but it's pretty good.

Sachin Monga (00:46:15):
That seems like an interesting can of worms.

Lenny (00:46:17):
Right, an interesting can of worms.

Sachin Monga (00:46:18):
We did talk about whether we should change our default publication. You know how your default name was just like Lenny's Newsletter and we probably gave you a little red square or something as your default publication logo originally. A DALL-E generated publication logo service would be pretty cool.

Lenny (00:46:33):
That would be cool. If nothing else, it's just for ideas, but I would love that. Coming back to the idea of someone starting a Substack, we talked about advice, which is the core advice is just start and see how you like it. A big part of this is like, do you want to keep doing this? Because again, it's easy to start, hard to keep going, and also you may realize, "I've created this job for myself I don't like." That's something they should be thoughtful about. But on the flip side, do you see any common mistakes people make when they're starting on Substack that you suggest they try to avoid?

Sachin Monga (00:47:02):
One thing that's interesting here that I think we have a big opportunity to improve in the product is that there's going to be obviously varying levels of intent that people have when they hit that start your Substack button. Some people might come in being like, "This is going to be my full-time job. I want to make this work. I want to not just be a full-time writer, I want to build a media empire on Substack." There's certainly examples of that happening now. You can imagine a version of our onboarding and set up flow that's like the media empire version of it.

Sachin Monga (00:47:28):
You could also imagine the version that's just, "Let me just write one thing. Don't make me make all these decisions. I just want to get in the game." I think that in general, a mistake that people might make is... I'll maybe flip it back to an anecdote related to what I heard from Chris when I was chatting with him the other day, that he had to convince you pretty hard to turn on payments at all. Correct me if I'm spreading misinformation, but is that right?

Lenny (00:47:51):
Yeah. And Hamish too. Especially on how often I can take a break, he's always given me advice of, "You can take a break more often than you think," because I feel like I can never not do a week. Both those pieces of advice. It took me a while to get over, maybe I could charge for this and then maybe I could take some weeks off.

Sachin Monga (00:48:10):
Right, right. I think there's a generalizable piece of advice here that might be my answer to the question of what's a common pitfall, which is people are really worried about how their audience will perceive them and really ultimately their own worth, right? Should I send a newsletter three times a week into people's inbox? Is that too much? Should I ask anyone to pay me ever? Is that crazy? Am I allowed to take a vacation ever given that I've got people paying on an ongoing basis? And is that a bad service to provide if I'm taking a two week summer vacation?

Sachin Monga (00:48:42):
I think almost in all of those cases, and then you could imagine five more things like that, readers, especially the people that are subscribed to you who are paying you, are pretty forgiving and are really there to support you and want you to take that vacation. There's probably more people who would want to pay for you that just don't even know about you that would totally pay if they could. Go back to that spectrum of, am I just trying to write a blog post? Am I trying to start a media empire? It's kind of like many people won't know yet. Just open up optionality for yourself and see what happens. Maybe don't be too worried about what your audience might think.

Sachin Monga (00:49:20):
I think that maybe is one difference between Substack than something like Twitter or Instagram or something. Subscribe as an action is pretty heavyweight. It's like a costly signal, right? It's not as easy as just matching the follow button on a bunch of accounts on Twitter or something like that. If someone is subscribed to you, they're granting you write access to their brain is maybe the way I view it in a nerdy sense. What that means is not just like, "I'll let you write your one long form thing once a week," but, "hey, you've got this other person that you think might have something interesting to say? Cool, let me know. I'm here for it." I think writers underestimate that.

Lenny (00:49:57):
Maybe three things I'll add to this just for folks that are thinking about, should I try this out? Should I not? One, when I joined Substack, I already felt like it was too late, and this was three years ago. I was like, "Nah, it's too late. Everyone's already got their big newsletters. There's no way I'm going to make any dent." I think people feel that now, and I think it's also not true. I think there's so much opportunity.

Sachin Monga (00:50:18):
100%.

Lenny (00:50:19):
Two, when I got to a thousand paid subscribers, which feels very doable, I was making around a 100K, which is exactly... I think it was Kevin Kelly's 1000 True Fans. It was exactly like, "Oh wow! I could make a living with a thousand true fans for real." It's shocking how much you could make with so few people that really care about what you're doing. Think about is there a niche or something you're excited about that you can find a thousand people to pay you 10 bucks a month.

Sachin Monga (00:50:52):
What's cool about that I think now with Substack and with the network effect is if there's a thousand people who are going to pay you 10 bucks a month, there's probably 2,000 and 5,000 and 10,000.

Lenny (00:50:58):
That's exactly what happened to me. I'm like, "If I hit a 100K, holy moly, I am good," and then it just kept growing. That's exactly right. You think there's an out, but the markets for these things are huge. The last point maybe is it took me nine months of doing it every week for free to get to a point where I felt like I can keep doing this. I enjoy doing this. People continue to value it, where I decided to turn on paid. It's a very slow and steady thing initially.

Lenny (00:51:24):
Don't expect it to just blow up. Just do it every week. See how it goes. See if you like it. See people like it. And if they do, keep going. If not, you can stop. When I launched my newsletter, I tweeted. I'm just going to experiment this thing. No idea where it's going to go. Just try it out, so you don't have to set the stakes high when you're starting out.

Sachin Monga (00:51:41):
I think that's exactly right. You mentioned Kevin Kelly's 1000 True Fans, which has become this canonical piece of writing on the internet now. My favorite Kevin Kelly blog post, that's my second favorite, my first favorite is a post that he wrote called You Are Not Late, which is exactly what you... You can probably picture what he says, but it's such a compelling, persuasive argument for the thing you mentioned, which is like... Obviously he wasn't talking about Substack in his post, but he was talking about the internet and how in the grand scheme of things, how lucky we are to...

Sachin Monga (00:52:13):
I don't even know when he wrote it, maybe it was probably 10 years ago at this point, but certainly at a time where a lot of people were feeling, "Oh, Facebook and Google and the internet's done. The battles have been won. I wish I was coming of age. I wish I had graduated from Harvard in 2004 or something." It's just so wrong. We are so early when it comes to how the internet will play out that I think getting to work on that in any capacity right now, getting to shape how the internet is going to play out over the next 10, 20 years is so fun because we are not late.

Lenny (00:52:40):
Here, here. I know Marc Andreessen mentioned those too when he moved to Silicon Valley in the '80s, "It's all over. It's too late. I missed the gold rush of tech," and it was just the beginning. Well, we've reached our very exciting lightning round where I'm just going to ask you a bunch of questions real quick, share whatever comes up. Sound good?

Sachin Monga (00:52:59):
Sure, let's do it.

Lenny (00:53:00):
What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Sachin Monga (00:53:04):
I will plug some books that have nothing to do with the internet or software or tech, but have been the most informative or instructive books for me I think in my career as a product person working on software, which are books about architecture and urban planning. The reason why I find this field so fascinating is because for thousands of years, people have been figuring out how to build spaces that help people interact with each other and build good spaces to occupy. We've only been doing this for, going back to the Kevin Kelly thing, for basically the blink of an eye on the internet and in the digital realm.

Sachin Monga (00:53:35):
There's one book in particular by an architect named Christopher Alexander who sadly just passed away earlier this year. He wrote this book in the '70s. It's called The Timeless Way of Building. This is the book that I recommend to the most people I have. I buy it in bulk and I just give it away to people. The basic premise of the book is that in the '70s, we had just gone through a couple of decades of just mass produced cookie cutter suburban house development in the US. His premise was like we've basically just lost the plot on this. No one likes living in these houses.

Sachin Monga (00:54:06):
If you think about why these houses all feel bad to live in, it's because the people building the houses now for the first time ever are different than the people living in the house. It's these developers, these real estate developers, these big companies, mass producing these houses. But for thousands of years, we've figured out what makes a good house. The people building the house are the people living in it and they get that, but now the incentive structure got changed and they messed everything up.

Sachin Monga (00:54:27):
I think there's a really interesting parallel there with the internet, specifically how the last decade or so has played out, where the people building the spaces that we occupy are operating under a very complicated incentive structure and it's leading to these suboptimal user experiences. This is what we work on at Substack. This is what I think is fun to work on right now. If you're working on something like this, I would highly recommend The Timeless Way of Building by Christopher Alexander.

Lenny (00:54:51):
Awesome. We're going to include that in the show notes for sure. What are two or three Substacks that you recommend most speaking of recommendation features?

Sachin Monga (00:54:59):
I was just thinking about this as I don't write on stack certainly frequently, and so I don't use the recommendations feature, but who would I recommend if I did besides Lenny, of course? I'll share a couple of random examples maybe, again, outside of maybe the tech product world. There's this guy named Darryl Cooper who has a podcast on Substack called The Martyr Made Podcast that I've gone super deep into lately. It's hard to describe. He basically takes a topic and he will produce the single best explanation of that topic you will ever find, because you'll spend an insane amount, probably 10,000 hours per topic, figuring out getting to the bottom of this story.

Sachin Monga (00:55:38):
He's doing a series right now in the labor movement in America. It sounds like a boring topic maybe, but he's just such an amazing storyteller. He's I think a good example too of this could only really work if he finds his thousand true fans as people who are just like, "Yeah, I'll just pay for this." It would be a very bad advertising business for sure. He publishes pretty infrequently, inconsistently, but it's just the highest quality stuff. That's The Martyr Made Podcast. Since I know this is supposed to be a lightning round and I spent too much time on that, the two others that I'll just quickly throw out there, Colin Meloy is one of my favorite musicians.

Sachin Monga (00:56:10):
He's the lead singer of The Decemberists. He's doing a really cool thing on his Substack right now of just a lot of interesting behind the scenes stuff on tour, publishing, audio and video. It's been really good. If you're a fan of The Decemberists, I highly recommend. One more, let's see, I have been really excited about Ethan Strauss lately. He writes a Substack called the House of Strauss. He's a basketball writer, but I think it's a cool example of like he just has subscribers now. He can write whatever he wants. He writes about a wide range of topics and they're all just really fascinating. I love to see that kind of thing happen on Substack and in general.

Lenny (00:56:41):
That's just reminding me, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar just recommended my newsletter in his Substack.

Sachin Monga (00:56:45):
Oh man, congrats! That must be a life achievement right there.

Lenny (00:56:50):
Yeah. I'm like, what the hell?

Sachin Monga (00:56:52):
Congrats!

Lenny (00:56:53):
Thank you.

Sachin Monga (00:56:54):
He's a great writer. .

Lenny (00:56:54):
I don't know if he reads it. I don't know. I don't know what's going on. I love it. He has got a great Substack, by the way. I think if you just Google Kareem Abdul-Jabbar Substack, you'll find it. On the recommendation feature, I was just thinking, do you want to shout out the folks that built it, the team?

Sachin Monga (00:57:07):
I would love to.

Lenny (00:57:08):
Let's do it.

Sachin Monga (00:57:09):
It's too many. It ended up being a company wide effort, but the product manager on my team, Dayne Rathbone, was specifically I think the spearhead behind the way that we built it, like you mentioned, that we went into. He was a really big proponent for that. Gabriel on our design team designed it and many engineers worked on it. It'll be hard to shout them all out, but I'd shout out Dayne on my team because he ensured that we built it in the way that we ultimately needed to build it for it to work.

Lenny (00:57:36):
Thank you, Dayne and Gabriel. Two final questions. Do you have any favorite recent movies or TV shows that you watched that you love?

Sachin Monga (00:57:44):
Yeah. I just finished the latest season of For All Mankind and loved it.

Lenny (00:57:49):
So good.

Sachin Monga (00:57:50):
Did you watch it all?

Lenny (00:57:52):
Yes. Oh my God! The last couple episodes, you're sitting on the edge of your seat.

Sachin Monga (00:57:55):
I feel like in this season, every episode was like its own standalone movie or something. It started slow the whole show. I think the first season was a bit slow. When I recommend it to people, I'm like, "Just power through it," but they really found their groove. I don't know. I'm stoked for the next season.

Lenny (00:58:10):
Same. Final question, what's a favorite interview question you like to ask folks when you're interviewing them?

Sachin Monga (00:58:16):
I have a tough time answering this question because I have found that there's not one question that will get me the signal I actually want given how diverse the candidate's experiences might be in their context. If you're coming from a Facebook type place or coming from a startup, I might need to ask different questions in order to get the signal I want. Maybe I'll answer it in that way, which is like these days, especially for Substack, what is the signal that I'm trying to get?

Sachin Monga (00:58:43):
I think really for early stage, fast growing startup, we talked so much about how different that is, we just need people who can run through walls to accomplish big goals. Maybe grit and endurance in some ways and drive are the words I would throw out there. I find it's really hard to have one question that will get that signal. We need to tailor it to that person's background.

Lenny (00:59:07):
All right, I'll accept that meta answer. Sachin, thank you so much for being here. As you I've shared, Substack is very near and dear to my heart, and I'm really thankful that you spent the time to dig into a lot of these things that have been on my mind. I imagine it will be helpful to a lot of other people. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more? Are y'all hiring? And then how can listeners be useful to you?

Sachin Monga (00:59:31):
First of all, thank you, Lenny, for being such an amazing Substack example setter. We talk about you all the time, as you can imagine internally, and you've been so helpful to the company and to our product team. It's been a real honor to get to come onto the pod and keep doing what you're doing. You can find me on all the various social media platforms. I'm not super active on them, I must admit, but maybe Twitter would be the one where I spend the most time, which is just Sachin Monga, my first name and last name, is my handle.

Sachin Monga (00:59:58):
I'll make one plug for a role that we're hiring for right at Substack, which is a senior data role with a product and growth analytics bent would be the specific archetype we're looking for in this role. If you are listening to the pod and feel like that might be you, I would love to chat. I think my email address too, I don't know if it would get shared, but it's just Sachin, my first name, @substackinc.com. Feel free to send me a note anytime.

Lenny (01:00:24):
Awesome. We'll include that in the show notes. Sounds like y'all are building some cool analytics features maybe based on that role. I'm excited for that. Awesome, man. Thank you for being here.

Sachin Monga (01:00:33):
My pleasure. Thank you so much for having me.

Lenny (01:00:37):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
The Sean Ellis test, such a seemingly simple idea that has had such a profound impact on the startup world.

Sean Ellis (00:00:07):
The question is, how would you feel if you could no longer use this product? Once you got a high enough percentage of users saying they'd be very disappointed, most of those products did pretty well. If you felt too low, those products tended to suffer.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:19):
Say someone is listening and they're like, "Okay. Man, I'm getting like 10%. I don't know what to do." What do you find often works?

Sean Ellis (00:00:25):
Just ignore the people who say they'd be somewhat disappointed. They're telling you it's a nice to have. If you start paying attention to what your somewhat disappointed users are telling you and then you start tweaking onboarding and product based on their feedback, maybe you're going to dilute it for your must have users.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:41):
Moving retention often is really hard, but I guess it sounds like there's often something you can do.

Sean Ellis (00:00:45):
It's usually much more function of onboarding to the right user experience than it is about the kind of the tactical things that people try to do to improve retention.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:53):
What are like three or four things that you think people should definitely try to help improve activation?

Sean Ellis (00:00:58):
In my experience-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:03):
Today, my guest is Sean Ellis. Sean is one of the earliest and most influential thinkers and operators in the world of growth. He coined the term growth hacking, invented the ICE prioritization framework, was one of the earliest people to use freemium as a growth strategy, and maybe most famously developed the Sean Ellis test to help you understand if you have product market fit, which a large percentage of founders use today and profoundly impacted the way startups are built. Over the course of his career, Sean was head of growth at Dropbox and Eventbrite, helped companies like Microsoft and Newbank refine their growth strategy, was on the founding team of LogMeIn, which eventually sold for over $4 billion, and he's the author of one of the most popular growth books of all time called Hacking Growth. In our conversation, we dive deep into two topics. One, how to know if you've got product market fit and what to do if you don't, and two, how to figure out how to grow once you've found product market fit.

(00:01:58):
If you're in the early stages of a new product wrangling with product market fit or trying to figure out how to jumpstart or further accelerate growth for your product, this episode is for you. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing feature episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Sean Ellis.

(00:02:23):
Sean, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Sean Ellis (00:02:27):
Thanks, Lenny. I'm super excited to be on with you.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:29):
There's so much that I want to talk about. There's so many directions we can go, but to keep it focused, I want to spend time on two areas. I want to talk about how to know if you have product market fit and what to do once you have product market fit in terms of figuring out how to grow. I know these things are very linked. I know you spent a lot of time on these things. How does this feel?

Sean Ellis (00:02:49):
Sounds perfect. Yeah, let's do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:51):
Okay. Okay, amazing. Let's talk about, first of all, the Sean Ellis test, slash something people call sometimes the product fit test. Such a seemingly simple idea that has had such a profound impact on the startup world. I've never actually seen you talk about the history of this thing, how you came up with these questions, how you came up 40%, the whole journey of this thing. So let's talk about this. But first of all, can you just tell people what is the Sean Ellis test for folks that aren't exactly familiar with this?

Sean Ellis (00:03:19):
It's a simple question that helps you figure out, does anyone consider your product a must-have, or ideally, who and how many people consider it, but ultimately it's about trying to figure out is your product a must-have, which could be equated to having product market fit. And so the question is, how would you feel if you could no longer use this product? And I give them the choice, very disappointed, somewhat disappointed, or even not disappointed or not applicable, I've already stopped using the product. And what I'm trying to find are those people who say, "I would be very disappointed if I could no longer use this product," then that's a really powerful vein to dig into when you discover that you actually have some people who would give a crap if your product disappears.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:08):
This episode is brought to you by Gamma, an entirely new way to present your ideas powered by AI. If you hate designing slides and dread that feeling of staring at a blank slide, Gamma is here to help. Just upload your PRD and turn it into a beautiful ready-to-present presentation in seconds. Gamma works with all types of formats from Google Docs, PDFs, to PowerPoint. You can even drop in a link to your favorite Lenny's newsletter post and turn it into a presentation for your team.

(00:04:39):
Gamma has become one of the fastest growing AI web products in the world, adding 20 million new users just this past year and is setting its sights on becoming the modern alternative to PowerPoint. Whether you have design skills or not, Gamma can save you hours of time synthesizing your ideas and shaping your content. Visit gamma.app and use promo code LENNY to get a free month of Gamma Pro. That's G-A-M-M-A, .app.

(00:05:07):
Let me tell you about CommandBar. If you're like me and most users I've built product for, you probably find those little in-product pop-ups really annoying. "Want to take a tour? Check out this new feature." And these pop-ups are becoming less and less effective since most users don't read what they say. They just want to close them as soon as possible. But every product builder knows that users need help to learn the ins and outs of your product. We use so many products every day and we can't possibly know the ins and outs of everyone.

(00:05:34):
CommandBar is an AI-powered toolkit for product, growth, marketing and customer teams to help users get the most out of your product without annoying them. They use AI to get closer to user intent, so they have search and chat products that users describe what they're trying to do in their own words and then see personalized results like customer walkthroughs or actions. And they do pop-ups too, but their nudges are based on in-product like confusion or intent classification, which makes them much less annoying and much more impactful. This works for web apps, mobile apps, and websites. And they work with industry-leading companies like Gusto, Freshworks, HashiCorp and LaunchDarkly. Over 15 million end-users have interacted with CommandBar. To try out CommandBar, you can sign up at commandbar.com/LENNY and you can unlock an extra 1,000 AI responses per month for any plan. That's commandbar.com/LENNY. And the idea is that if you, 40% or more of people, say they'd be very disappointed if they can no longer use the product, you essentially have product market fit.

Sean Ellis (00:06:40):
I would say it's a leading indicator of product market fit. The lightning indicator is, do they actually keep using it? So probably retention cohorts are more accurate, but the problem is, like your time at Airbnb, how long do you have to look at a retention cohort before you know that you've actually long-term retained someone?

(00:07:01):
And so with this question, you can kind of find out day one, you don't need a good analytics system in place to be able to see if product market fit exists. And so yeah, the 40% was not something I originally had in there. Originally, I was trying to have just a filter so that I was not treating all feedback from customers the same, but I was trying to find feedback from customers who actually really cared about the product. And then was over time, at the time I was working for a couple of YC-backed companies, and so those companies were all pretty connected, and so I would share the question with a lot of other startups in Silicon Valley. And so over time, I started to see there was a pattern that once you got a high enough percentage of users saying they'd be very disappointed, most of those very disappointed without the product, most of those products did pretty well. And then if you felt too low, those products tended to suffer.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:05):
Okay, there's two things I want to definitely follow up on here. The first is such an important point that you made at the beginning when I introduced this test that you described it as a leading indicator of product market fit and actually retention, people actually using your product, the product actually being used by the market is the actual ultimate test. So the idea here is this is a good way to get a sense of, before you actually have data, are we headed in a good direction? Could you speak more about that, of like, when to use this and when it's most useful in best [inaudible 00:08:34]?

Sean Ellis (00:08:33):
Yeah. I mean, so for me in particular, when I come into a company, my goal is to help them grow. And so I don't want to put myself in a situation where I'm going to fail because no one actually cares about the product. And so it can really be asked at a company of any stage. It's helpful to understand who your must have users are. But essentially once you have even an MVP, like a very first MVP on the product, you can still get some useful feedback about the product if it's resonating with anyone.

(00:09:08):
So I actually had a company where I had committed to work with them. It was right after I left Dropbox and I committed to work with these guys for six months to help them grow. I ran the question and it came back at only 7% of users saying they'd be very disappointed without the product. And so I'm like, "I have six months to help them grow and they're only at 7% right now. It might take six months to get the 40%. Am I doing them a disservice by being in a growth role and being on payroll during this period of time?" But fortunately with the signal and the information we got from the initial survey, we were able to get them at 40% in two weeks.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:50):
Wow. What did you do there just as a case study?

Sean Ellis (00:09:53):
Yeah. Yeah. So the company called Lookout, it's a mobile security company, and now most of the things in Lookout are built into iPhones and Androids. But at that time, the product had everything from backup my data to find my lost phone to protecting your phone with a firewall and antivirus. And so when we ran this initial survey, I dug into the 7% who said they'd be very disappointed without the product and found that most of that 7% were focused on the antivirus functionality. So they were like, they know they need to protect their computer from viruses, smartphones were becoming more like computers, so it just made a lot of sense for them that they'd need to protect their phone. And interesting, at the time, I think there was only one kind of phone virus that had ever even happened, but it was a pretty easy mental leap for people.

(00:10:50):
And so now we knew, okay, it's antivirus that people really valued. And so step one was just reposition the product on antivirus. So that kind of creates a filter. So anyone who now is coming in to sign up for the product who doesn't care about antivirus is not going to convert, and those who are excited about antivirus are going to convert. We already know from the initial survey that people value that after they convert. So by setting the right expectations around it up front, you're going to bring people in with the right expectations. But then the second thing that we did was we streamlined onboarding so that the first thing that they did after signing up for the product was to set up the antivirus and then get a message "you're now protected from viruses."

(00:11:38):
And so it's really the combination of those two things. It's set the right expectations and then speed to value. And so the next cohort of people that we surveyed were at 40% saying they'd be very disappointed without the product. So that literally took two weeks to make those changes. Six months later, it was 60% on the score. And then I think they hit the billion dollar valuation four or five years later on ultimately being one of the early unicorns.

(00:12:11):
And interestingly, as all of those things were built into mobile phones now, they've completely changed the business, but they continue to do really well, but they've continued to iterate the business. I think that having that kind of finger on the pulse early in the business was important to build the muscle in the business to be really responsive as the market changed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:35):
Sean, this is already amazing. There's just a fractal of topics I want to explore from this very short conversation already. So the first is just follow this thread of basically you're sharing kind of a growth strategy that I imagine you execute, is look for the percentage of people that would be very disappointed if your product went away, see who they are, see what they're excited about and lean into that both positioning-wise, onboarding-wise, and probably also cut out stuff from your product that they don't care about.

Sean Ellis (00:13:02):
Yeah. And I was coming at it from a marketing perspective initially. Over time, I position myself more in a growth role with product and marketing as areas I could influence. But as a marketer, I probably didn't have a lot of influence on a engineering founded company to say, "Let's cut out stuff." So it made more sense to say, "Let's just sequence the onboarding so that we're highlighting this and onboarding to this." That was a little easier to sell.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:33):
And just hearing that you can move this score so quickly without even changing the product substantially, I imagine what surprised a lot of people when you think about moving retention often is really hard. And maybe we talk about that, but I guess it sounds like there's often something you can do that's not very hard that might significantly shift this product market fit test.

Sean Ellis (00:13:57):
Right. And then that ultimately moving retention is really hard, but it's usually much more function of onboarding to the right user experience than it is about the tactical things that people try to do to improve retention.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:11):
Okay. I want to put a pin on that and come back to that because a really important topic. I'm going to come back to, say someone runs this survey and they get 40%, what should they have in their mind of like, "This is what this is telling me"? Because I think a lot of people are like, "I got product market fit. I got this. Let's go, go, go." What's the best way to think about what this tells you?

Sean Ellis (00:14:30):
Yeah, I mean it tells you something really important, which is, you haven't created something that people don't care about. So that's an important insight. But until you deeply understand that product market fit, you kind of don't have the tools to be able to grow the business. So that's really the next step, is to dig in and figure out who considers it a must have, how are they using the product, what did they use before, what problem are they solving.

(00:14:59):
One of my favorite questions is... So I tend to have a lot of questions that I build off of that I'm using that filter, trying to drill into the users who say they'd be very disappointed without the product, and one of my favorite questions is, "What is the primary benefit that you get?" And then I use that initially as an open-ended question to kind of crowdsource different benefits people are getting. But then I run another survey where I turn it into a multiple choice question, force them to pick one of four distinctive benefit statements. And then the question that follows on that next survey is, "Why is that benefit important to you?" And then I start to get really good context.

(00:15:43):
So I actually came up with this question when I was working with an early YC company called Xobni, which is inbox felt backwards. And when I ran that question, basically the people who said they'd be very disappointed without the product we're focused on, "Xobni helps me find things faster in my email." So it's great to know, okay, that's the benefit. But when I asked, "Why is that benefit important to you?" They said, "Oh, I'm drowning in email." I kept seeing that statement as a written statement. And so when I then was trying to figure out how to acquire customers, when I tested "drowning in email?", that set such a good hook. That was the context that people were living in, that they were really responsive to the message of find things faster with Xobni and then a description of what Xobni is. So I think when you can really dig into the context of why that must have benefit is important to people, you start to get the ingredients to build that flywheel that leads to long-term sustainable growth.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:51):
So what I'm hearing is whether you have 40%, whether you have 60% or even 7%, the actual best use of this tool is look at that percentage of highly disappointed and see what they're looking for, what they're excited about.

Sean Ellis (00:17:04):
Start drilling in, start feeling back that onion-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:04):
Start drilling in.

Sean Ellis (00:17:06):
... and just deeply understand them and make sure that ultimately your product roadmap is doubling down on the things that are important to your must-have customers. Onboarding is bringing new people to the right experience. Your messaging is setting the right expectations, your acquisition campaigns are targeting people who actually have the need. And so it's all about getting the right people to the right experience. And then even your engagement loop is about just reinforcing how to get people to experience that benefit more often.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:40):
Awesome. And the 40% threshold, so what you shared is you basically emerged from just looking at tons of startups doing the survey and finding a pattern. How firm is that 40%? How big of a deal? Is it 39 versus 41?

Sean Ellis (00:17:53):
I don't think it's that firm. To me, I think the real power is having some kind of target for the team to be shooting for that basically says, "We're not going to aggressively start to grow until we hit this target." And I think that as just a focusing piece is really important because I think one of the biggest challenges in an early stage startup is half the people feel like we're years from having this product ready to grow, and half the people are like, "What are we waiting for?" Where if you can actually get people on the same page of what does product market fit look like for our business, and it's at that point that we're going to.

(00:18:36):
Before I ever heard the term product market fit, I remember the conversations back at LogMeIn in the mid 2000s of kind of like, "When do we step on the gas? What is the combination of factors that need to be in place before we start pouring fuel on the early fire?" And so yeah, I think that kind of nail it then scale it. It's probably been a term that's been around for decades now, but it's all kind of pointing to that same concept of product market fit.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:03):
How often have you seen false positives with this test where someone gets 40% and something is not right, they're actually far from it? Or is it generally pretty accurate?

Sean Ellis (00:19:14):
If you're having people say that they'd be very disappointed without your product, that's a really good sign. What I can tell you is that not necessarily a false positive, but what is driving people to say they'd be very disappointed. One of my favorite books is Hooked by Nir Eyal and he talks about in the kind of engagement loop that your last step is investment.

(00:19:38):
And so I ran the survey on a business that I thought was a fairly commoditized business. Part of it I wanted to see, could I use the same go-to-market approach on a later stage company and use it to accelerate growth. And so this was a business called webs.com. They eventually got acquired by VistaPrint. But they'd been pretty flat for the year before I went in there. And then I started to use this approach to try to dial in their growth engine. I ran the survey thinking, "Yeah, you've had products like Wix and Weebly that have come on to the market since this more legacy website building product has been around. I personally think they're a little easier to use, they're a little better." And so I didn't have high hopes when I ran the survey, but it came back with one of the highest scores I'd ever seen. And it was like 90% of the people saying they'd be very disappointed if they could no longer use the product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:39):
Holy shit. I've never seen that.

Sean Ellis (00:20:39):
And I was like, "How could that be possible? This product is kind of a commoditized category. I wouldn't even say it's one of the best." And then when I want to dug into it again, it comes back to that Nir Eyal Hooked model, is that the investment people have made in building that website, they put so much into that they know exactly how to make the changes and the kind of the CMS kind of side of things, they have spent a lot of time just making it beautiful. And so ultimately it was something that that was why they were saying they'd be very disappointed.

(00:21:15):
But fast-forward when I initially went in, still doing these things help the business resume growth and have significant growth over the next 12 months after we did these things. So still the signal we got from why people would be very disappointed without the product was important and speed to value. All the other things I think about in go-to-market for an early stage product still were relevant, but just I think they were a little stronger on the percentage he'd be very disappointed.

(00:21:51):
Even Eventbrite when I was there when we ran it was probably the second highest I'd ever seen. But with event organizers, if they've already set their event up on that platform and they've sent it out to their list and all those people are coming in and they're managing their event, again, they've invested a lot in the platform. So sort of switching costs I think can factor in there. So it's a function of both switching costs and utility of the product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:22):
So that's a question I wanted to ask is, what's your guidance on when to ask this question? What I'm hearing is, if you ask it very far along the journey, when they're very invested, you'll get a much higher score. Is there any advice on the timing and the best time to ask this question to your users?

Sean Ellis (00:22:38):
What I recommend is a random sample of people who've really used your product. So they've gone in, they didn't just sign up, but they went in and hopefully hit that deviation moment. They've used it twice, two plus times, and they've ideally used it, say, within the last week or two weeks, so they haven't churned yet. So if it's a random sample of those people, that's kind of the ideal time to ask it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:09):
Got it. So basically it's people that have activated whatever that means to you and have been using it for a couple weeks?

Sean Ellis (00:23:14):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:14):
Not people landing in your home page, not people just signing up, not people months later.

Sean Ellis (00:23:19):
Not people who've seen a demo of your product, but it's people who actually have experienced the product. But it's okay if you're hitting people who've used it months later, but in that Lookout example that I gave, if I'm testing people's perception of the product after I made updates to the onboarding, I'm going to only want to survey people who went through the new onboarding.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:43):
Yep. In the experimental. Yeah. Okay. So I asked people on Twitter what to ask you. A lot of people had a lot of awesome questions. I'm going to sprinkle in a couple of these questions throughout the chat.

Sean Ellis (00:23:54):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:54):
One came in from Shraaz Doshi, a popular guest of the podcast.

Sean Ellis (00:23:59):
One of the ones that I listened to recently.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:01):
Amazing. I think it's the second most popular episode behind Brian Chesky. Okay. So he had a question of just, "What are the limitations of the score? When does it break down? When should you not use it if ever?" Is there anything of just like, "Here's when it's not going to work for you"?

Sean Ellis (00:24:14):
Yeah. I think one-off products would probably, like, how would you feel if you could no longer watch the movie you just watch? I wouldn't care. Even when I run a workshop, I don't run this as part of my survey after I do a workshop because how would you feel if you could no longer attend the workshop you just attended? It doesn't make sense. So I'll ask an NPS question as my filtering question so that I'm looking at focusing in on feedback of people who love it, also then through a separate lens, looking at people maybe who would be my detractors. So I think one-off products are probably not good products to run the question on. There may be other places as well that I'm not thinking of right now, but that [inaudible 00:25:00].

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:00):
It sounds like not many. What I'm hearing is it's generally widely applicable.

Sean Ellis (00:25:04):
Yeah, I think it is, at least from my perspective. It's been really useful for me anyway.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:12):
Awesome. Okay. And then the follow-up question from Shraaz is, and I kind of asked this, but I'm curious if there's anything more here, just, "Have you seen any instances of startups over relying on the score prematurely declaring product market fit when in reality they haven't reached it yet? And just are there any other caveats of like, 'Cool, I got 40%'?" Is there anything else you should know, like, " Okay. But maybe check this one thing"?

Sean Ellis (00:25:31):
Yeah, I mean, I think to me it's kind of like what really is the definition of product market fit is the definition that people who get through my crappy onboarding and actually experience the product love it. And if I'm able to retain those people, that means I have product market fit. Or, is fixing that crappy onboarding part of getting to product market fit as well? I think that's up for debate.

(00:25:55):
So to me, the hardest, I wouldn't obsess on onboarding if I know those who kind of get through the challenge of getting started with the product still don't like the product then feels like it's a core product issue or wrong people using it in the wrong way issue. But once you have that, then ultimately it doesn't mean that you're ready to grow. When I focus on growth, then customer acquisition is almost the last step. Once I validate that it's a must have for those early users, then I'm thinking about, "Okay, how do I optimize speed to value? How do I make sure that people have the right prompts to come back and use the product at the right time so that's kind of more of that engagement loop? How do I get my existing users to bring in more users if there's something that makes sense on that end? Even how do I optimize my revenue model?"

(00:26:53):
Once all of those things are working well, then I'll obsess on the customer acquisition side. But customer acquisition is so hard that if you're not really efficient at converting-

Sean Ellis (00:27:00):
... customer acquisition is so hard that if you're not really efficient at converting and retaining and monetizing people, you're going to really struggle on the customer acquisition side.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:09):
Yeah, cool. And we'll talk about customer acquisition/growth.

Sean Ellis (00:27:13):
Sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:14):
Another question I wanted to ask, and a couple listeners asked, is the 40%. I had Jag from Nubank on the podcast, I think you may have worked with them, and they use 50% as their threshold because apparently Brazilians are very nice.

Sean Ellis (00:27:27):
Yeah. Optimistic I think is what I said.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:31):
Yeah. I guess the question is do you find instances where you should increase that percentage? And in B2B, is anything different? Do you change the percentage in B2B? Any advice there just when you adjust the threshold?

Sean Ellis (00:27:42):
Yeah, I hadn't really thought too much on that. Again, for me, generally I'm trying to just figure out is this a product that can grow? So if I got a 37%, am I going to be like, "Oh no, this would be impossible?" Or if I had a 70%, does that mean I'd say, "Oh yeah, I want to jump in and work with this company?" It's more nuanced than that. Obviously, if it's a 70%, but I have no idea how I grow the business, I'm going to be stuck there. But I do think he brought up a really good point that, culturally, some people are going to be more optimistic or pessimistic. Interestingly, when I came up with the question, I used to just use a normal satisfaction question.

(00:28:39):
When I was working at Xobni, I'm just an intensely curious person anyway, so I'm just trying to dig in and understand the customers, and so I've always done lots of surveying. But at Xobni, I was going to use my filter as a satisfaction question, so how satisfied are you with this? I'm very satisfied. I'm somewhat satisfied. And our main customers were actually senior management, and so I thought senior management's never satisfied. I'm going to get always this super lukewarm thing. How can I change this question to give me a more real answer from these guys? Well, if I flip it and say, "How would you feel if you could no longer use this product?" I'll probably get a more honest answer back from them. And of course, they're very disappointed if they can't get what they want.

(00:29:29):
And so initially it was just for the case of Xobni, but then I went to Dropbox right after Xobni and like, "Oh, I'll try the question again." And the insights I got back were really useful. And so each company I went to, I kept using the question. I'm like, this works way better than your typical satisfaction question. But initially, it was more about thinking just senior management to get a more honest answer out of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:54):
So that's the origin story right there?

Sean Ellis (00:29:56):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:57):
Wow. That senior managers are just very harsh and they don't need anything?

Sean Ellis (00:30:02):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:02):
And you have to flip it. That is so interesting. That question is such a good reminder of how hard it is to build anything people really would be disappointed not to have. That's why this works so well. People are like, "I don't need this. Who cares?" That's the core of this, is just that is hard.

Sean Ellis (00:30:19):
Especially when I first moved to Silicon Valley. The first 15 years of my career were not in Silicon Valley, and so I was in Eastern Europe and then New York and then Boston. But you move to Silicon Valley and you have people who get really excited about technology for technology's sake. And so just something being cool is like, "Isn't it cool that we can actually do this?" drives a lot of people. And so to me, I'm very practical. If it's not something that is really bringing value to people, then the likelihood that that product's successful long-term is going to be pretty low.

(00:30:59):
Even, interestingly, at Dropbox, through the six months I was there, I'd ask one question multiple times a month. I broke the early beta users into a bunch of different lists. And I'd ask, "Which best describes you? I like to be among the first to try cool new technology, or, I only try things that I think will be useful for me?" And over the six months, it flipped from 90% being people who try things that they want to try cool new technology to six months later, it was people who only are going to try something that they feel like is useful. But what's cool is just because what motivates you to try something is you're an early adopter and you want to try something cool, if you're going to keep using it, it's because it's giving you some utility. And so I can still use those early adopters to help me figure out where's the value inside the product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:54):
Awesome. So actually, two questions along those lines. How durable do you find this percentage being? Say you hit 40%, how often does that fade and go away versus stay there or go higher?

Sean Ellis (00:32:07):
Yeah, I haven't seen it really fade back down, but I've seen companies fail despite having it. And I think a lot of times then, it becomes an execution challenge. Once you have product-market fit, not everyone's going to be a good executor. But before that, I think getting to product-market fit, obviously there's a lot of methodology for doing it today that might make it a bit easier for people, but I still think it's fairly random and pretty dang hard. And so ultimately, the risk factor of creating something that people care about is really difficult. So if you can get to the point where you have 40% of the people who are using it saying they'd be very disappointed, and you have a reasonable sample size. Let's say you've got 10 people and four of them said they'd be very disappointed without it, you're still going to get something useful from those four. But I wouldn't say that's a sample size that you can really go to market on, so yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:07):
What's a good sample size you look for of just, "Okay, this is actually good data I want to rely on?"

Sean Ellis (00:33:11):
It's really funny. So much of the stuff I self-learned, but I basically at one point said I need at least 30 responses, and I just thought I randomly made up a number and then I had people telling me, "Yeah, 30 is the minimum that you want on stuff." Okay. And even when I first created this survey, I remember showing it to the co-founder of SlideShare and her PhD was in survey-related stuff like cognitive psychology, but she basically said it was really about surveying. And she's like, "This methodology is amazing. How did you come up with this?" And so having some of that validation around these things helped. But a lot of it was just, again, driven by my own curiosity and also just knowing that that failure is such a likely outcome that trying to reverse engineer that failure, and then the number one reason for failure would be that people don't actually care about the product. And so when I find that, that's a really good sign that we're now down to an execution challenge.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:15):
And there's this obvious element of you may have product-market fit with people, but that group might end up being very small and the business you build around it could actually be cool, but it's not going to be a massive business. Is there anything there you can share? It's hard to know the size opportunity even though some people really, really like it.

Sean Ellis (00:34:35):
Yeah, I talked about I go to a multiple choice after I initially use open-ended questions to crowdsource the different use cases. But then I try to force people in a bucket, and then I can run filters on each of those buckets and I'll be like, "Oh, people who use it this way are like 60% likely to be very disappointed without the product, but people who use it this way are 35% likely to be very disappointed, but way more people use it the 35% way." And so then, do you want that intensely loyal group or the much broader group that's maybe a bit less, but almost there?

(00:35:17):
I think that becomes a bit of a strategic conversation of do we want to have a better chance of surviving, going after a niche that we know we can serve well? Or have we raised so much money that we have to go after a really big market, and one that's not going to be long-term? But maybe then you're like, "Okay, once I have traction in that market, I can start to try to appeal to some other markets." But I think that's where some strategic decisions come in.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:47):
Do you have a heuristic of which you often recommend or is it very dependent on the situation?

Sean Ellis (00:35:53):
I prefer a more passionate customer base and work from there, just because I think your biggest competition when you're really innovating is just being irrelevant. And so if you're deeply relevant to anyone, I think that gives you a much better chance of long-term success.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:12):
Awesome. That's a really good insight. Okay, two more questions along this line and then I want to talk about growth strategy. One very tactical question. Is there a tool you recommend for doing this sort of survey? Do you recommend inline? In the product? An email? Something else?

Sean Ellis (00:36:26):
I've used a lot of different tools. I actually had a survey business that I sold to private equity years ago. It is called Qualaroo. That's an inflow survey tool. I think just using SurveyMonkey with emailed surveys works fine. And for me, it's a lot more of what's pleasant for the customer to fill out and then what's going to give me something where I can work really easily with the data? So at Bounce, for example, they had already intercom in place that had just introduced surveying, but it was a really crappy customer experience, at least at that time. That's been almost a year now or actually a little over a year. And so I'm really sensitive to is it a good survey experience for the consumer itself? But yeah, I don't think I'm stuck to any one platform there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:30):
Such an important topic. Just, again, to remind people why this is so important, one of the most common questions founders ask is, "Do I have product-market fit? Have I built something people want?" That's just an endless series of, "I don't know. How do I know? When do I know?" And this is telling you in a really interesting way. So your advice is this is a leading indicator. You don't actually know until people actually start using it and whether they retain and continue using it. Is there just advice on the shift you make from relying on the survey to actually looking at retention cohorts? Is it just once you have enough data, once you have a couple of cohorts, then start looking at that? Forget about the survey?

Sean Ellis (00:38:05):
Yeah, but retention cohorts don't give you any of the qualitative insights into the why, so that's why we continue to do the survey. So initially I would say if the survey comes back and it shows whatever your target number is... If you want to be Nubank, it'd be a 50%. Or two of the companies I launched, we launched in Hungary, and I would say it was the opposite end of the spectrum of Brazil, maybe more pessimistic than the average culture. And so maybe 30% is good enough there, but that ultimately, whatever your target is, that you have the signal that says, "Okay, we have enough value here. Let's start working on growing the business." But while you're working on growing the business, I would be paying attention to those retention cohorts. And if you're churning out all the customers who were saying that they'd be very disappointed without the product, then okay, let's retrench and rethink, do we really have product-market fit here and what do we need to do to get it if we don't?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:12):
Awesome. And speaking of Nubank, if anyone wants to see how a company has actually operationalized this in the way they operate, that there's an episode that we'll link to in the show notes where every new product at Nubank they build, before they launch it, they wait for 50% threshold. For people to say 50% of people would be disappointed if this product did not exist as they're developing it. And only then do they launch it publicly.

Sean Ellis (00:39:36):
Yeah, I think they even do it down to the feature level.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:39):
Wow.

Sean Ellis (00:39:40):
So if you think about it, how would you feel if you can no longer use this feature starts to give you, again, the signal, is that feature a must-have feature? And if it's not, maybe we shouldn't have it. And so yeah, I was super excited when I saw how they were using the survey and they were doing it before I engaged with them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:00):
Oh, wow. That's awesome.

Sean Ellis (00:40:01):
But they were doing it, I think, from pretty early on in the business.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:05):
The reason they can do this is they have a lot of users. They have millions of millions of users, so they can ask some small percentage of people this question. Because people hearing this might be like, "Oh my God, how many times am I going to be asked this question when I'm using this feature?" But they have a lot of users, so it's easier.

Sean Ellis (00:40:17):
Yeah. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:18):
Okay. Last question, I promise, along these lines. Say someone is listening and they're like, "Okay. Man, I'm getting 10%, I'm getting 15%. I don't know what to do to increase my product-market fit." You should have just a strategy of just dig into the people that are very disappointed and see what they have to say. But any other advice/what do you find often works in helping people move from, say, 10% to 40%?

Sean Ellis (00:40:43):
Yeah, so one of the things that's cool about almost open-sourcing the survey approach is, again, watching how Nubank has evolved their usage. But one of the other companies that I think used it in an interesting way is Superhuman. And I would say that they basically ended up probably putting a lot more momentum behind the question than it had even before. They posted something about how they did it on First Round Capital's blog. And what I have always said, and again, it's me coming at it from probably initially a marketing background, which is I'm taking the product as a fixed thing, and how do I actually figure out how to market and grow this product? And product changes are going to take a long time, and so what are the variables that I can control with a marketing background? So one of the things I've always said is just ignore the people who say they'd be somewhat disappointed. They're telling you it's a nice to have. They're as good as gone, so just ignore those guys.

(00:41:54):
I'll put one piece in the middle there before I say what Superhuman did. The reason that I say ignore those guys is that if you start paying attention to what you somewhat disappointed users are telling you, and then you start tweaking onboarding and product based on their feedback, maybe you're going to dilute it for your must-have users. And ultimately, it becomes kind of good for everyone but not great for anyone. And so that was my fear of trying to read too much into the users who say they'd be somewhat disappointed. But the Superhuman guys actually found, I think, a good way around that where they said, "Okay, what is the benefit that my must-have users are focused on? And then of the users who say they'd be somewhat disappointed, so the nice-to-have users, of those users who are also focused on that benefit, what do they need in the product for it then to become a must-have for them?"

(00:42:48):
And so they're staying true to that core benefit, but they're trying to essentially take those on-the-fence users and moving them up. And so I think their way of approaching that addressed what my concern was, which is are we going to break it for the must-have users?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:05):
That's an awesome insight. By the way, did Rahul and the team there just do this on their own or were you involved in any way in this at Superhuman?

Sean Ellis (00:43:11):
No. That's the same thing. Like I said, I wasn't initially involved with Nubank. I wasn't involved with them. We wrote about it in our book in 2017, and so I think that I got it out there. But I actually teamed up with the Kissmetrics team in 2012, and essentially published this survey on survey.io where we just made it freely available for people and a really easy template to prepare and send out, and the how-to guide on it. It was all just free. Kissmetrics is using it as maybe lead gen. And for me, I just wanted a way to put something out for the community. And so it's been out there for a long time, so it's not surprising that different companies have found different unique ways to use it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:01):
That's awesome. I think that post is one of the most popular in First Round. It really had an impact on a lot of people.

Sean Ellis (00:44:05):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:06):
So just to repeat, the approach you recommend for when you're digging into... I wrote this down. When you were talking for how to dig into what benefit people are finding, your advice is it's basically a follow-up survey to the extremely disappointed people asking them what is the primary benefit you get? It's an open text initially. Then once you get a collection, you do it sounds like another survey as multiple choice. Here's five benefits-

Sean Ellis (00:44:31):
To a different group of people, to be clear.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:33):
Different group. Yeah. Got it. Awesome. And then it's like, which of these four or five benefits is what you're getting out of this product? And then the question is, why is this benefit important to you?

Sean Ellis (00:44:45):
Eventually the survey.io got closed down, but essentially the template that I typically used was then moved to PMFsurvey.com. And so you'll see some other questions that I have on there as well, like what would you use instead if this product were no longer available? And that's one of the interesting things is you start to see people who say they'd be somewhat disappointed, usually, they're focused on a commodity use case and they know an easy alternative to switch to. So to be a must-have, it needs to be both valuable and unique.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:18):
Okay. Anything else on this topic of the Sean Ellis task product-market fit test before we move on to growth strategy advice?

Sean Ellis (00:45:26):
No, I think that's it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:26):
I think we did almost an hour on that one topic, which I love because I feel like this is such a powerful tool that I think people sort of know and have used, but I think there's a lot of opportunity to use it more effectively. And all the stuff you pointed out about it's not just you have this threshold goal, let's move, let's grow. It's like, this is how you figure out how to make it better and better and grow faster and faster. And it's actually a good segue to talking about growth.

(00:45:50):
Even though you coined the term growth hacking, you spend most of your time on the opposite, essentially, which is helping companies figure out sustainable growth strategies, not just a bunch of hacks to grow for a little bit and then disappear. And from what I've seen, it's all rooted in this idea of product-market fit and what helps you find product-market fit, and I imagine many of the stuff we've talked about.

Sean Ellis (00:46:10):
Yeah. Just one quick interjection there is that when I coined growth hacking, I did not think of it as a bunch of one-off hacks. What I thought of it was what's more about what is the way to ultimately drive sustainable growth? But it's, over time, maybe more interpreted the way you described it, but just to jump in and say that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:30):
That's a really good clarification, so how did you actually initially frame it when you first-

Sean Ellis (00:46:34):
Yeah, I just said it's about looking at every single thing that you're doing and scrutinizing its impact on growth in the business. And particularly, I think most marketers, when I first moved to Silicon Valley, most CEOs who were asking me to help their companies, they were saying, "We need help with awareness-building," and I'm getting introductions from top VCs. And so, so much of, I think, the way people were approaching growth was marketing textbook how to approach it. And startups just don't have the luxury to do all of those things, and so you got to really focus on how do I acquire customers to an experience that's going to make them keep using this product? And so maybe I picked the wrong term in calling it growth hacking, but I think it at least opened the conversation to getting more people thinking about maybe we should be thinking about growth in a different way than as it's traditionally taught in marketing courses in school.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:33):
Is there another term you think you should have used? Do you always think back, I should have called it this? Is there anything that you've had in your mind?

Sean Ellis (00:47:41):
I don't. I think sometimes having something that's a little divisive is almost better because it's too easy to just go completely unnoticed. But I was trying to put a name on not just how I was approaching growth, but seeing Facebook obviously had a very different approach to growth than most companies. LinkedIn, Twitter, there was a handful of companies that were approaching it in the same way I had previously been approaching it, and I just thought this thing needs a name. And so I sat down with a couple of friends, came up with a name and it stuck. But yeah, obviously from day one it was pretty divisive with different groups.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:23):
That's a fun story. Thanks for sharing that.

(00:48:25):
Okay, so talking about growth and helping companies figure out how to grow. Say you go to a company, they're getting 42% on the Sean Ellis test, and they're like, "Okay, cool, let's start thinking about growth." What's your first piece of advice to them to start when they're thinking about growth? And then just broadly, how do you approach helping them figure out how to grow?

Sean Ellis (00:48:45):
Ultimately, it's about trying to get as many of the right people to that same state that we just talked about with the must-have users, so trying to get as many people to experience the product in a way where they'd be very disappointed if they could no longer use the product. And so that's not just acquisition, which is how most companies think about... Initially, it was awareness then maybe the more developed way was, oh, let's at least focus on profitable acquisition. But in my experience, the hardest part really sits inside the product team, so how do you shape that first user experience so they actually use it in the right way and it's not so difficult that they give up? And that ultimately, we understand what makes it a must-have product. And then what we're trying to do is build a... Yeah, it sounds kind of theoretical here, but I can go into the details on how, but build a flywheel around that must-have value.

(00:49:45):
So step one would be understand it. Step two for me is then figure out a metric that essentially captures units of that value being delivered. And so when I think about a north star metric, that's what I'm thinking about is something that reflects how many people are coming in and experiencing that product-market fit experience, whatever that is. And it's not just me telling them, "Here's what your north star metric should be." It's that ultimately the team needs to decide that together. And then really just diagramming, what are all of the different ways that we can grow that north star metric? So that's where you start to actually build, I call it a value delivery engine, but it's what does our onboarding look like? What's that aha moment? That activation? What does the engagement loop look like? Is there any referral? Try to capture it as it is today.

(00:50:47):
And then, from there, thinking about where are the biggest opportunities for improvement, so those high-leverage opportunities, and then ultimately starting to run experiments against those opportunities. Generally, I think I touched on it a little bit earlier, but generally the sequence that I like to do is start with activation because that one's just so critical and it's easy to get lost in between, especially for an early product. The product team's so focused on the roadmap. We're two features away from not even needing marketing anymore. This thing's going to take off. And then a marketing team so focused on bringing new people in, but how do you get those new people to a great first experience falls through the cracks a lot of times. So a lot of focus on activation and then engagement and referral and getting the revenue model right. And then once each of those pieces are working well, then starting to really obsess on the channel side.

(00:51:49):
One thing that I'll say. When I go in and directly am involved with a company on the acquisition side, I am thinking about my hypotheses on the acquisition pretty early on, because if I go into it and I have no idea how we'll acquire those customers, I'm not real confident I'll figure it out when I'm there. So I want to have two or three things that seem pretty viable as ways to profitably acquire customers, and knowing that once I get deep into it, I'll probably come up with one or two more and I've got five, one of them's likely to work. But I don't want to just be under the pressure of having to come up with that once I come in, if I don't at least see an angle from that before I get involved with the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:36):
What I'm hearing is when you come into a company and they're asking, "Sean, how do we figure out how to grow this thing?" you actually focus first on activation onboarding, and we're going to talk about all these things. Then, after that, basically these are priority order for you. Then it's flywheel engagement referral stuff to see if there's a way to drive that. Then revenue. How do we make money with this and how do we make sure we're doing this profitably? And only then do you start to go big on acquisition top-of-funnel growth.

Sean Ellis (00:53:05):
Yeah. I may need to do some acquisition stuff before just to bring enough flow-through, but I'm not obsessing on how scalable is this. It's just like, yeah, let's get enough people coming through that we can start to take the slack out. Part of it comes down to that the acquisition side is so competitive now that if you're not really efficient at converting and retaining and monetizing customers, you can't find scalable, profitable customer acquisition channels.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:33):
This is fascinating because I think a lot of people probably do the opposite. Start driving a bunch of growth to a product, then we'll fix onboarding, then we'll figure out how we're making money, and referrals comes along there. So I think this is really important for people to hear. So again, the reason you invest first and focus a lot on onboarding/getting people activated is because that is very correlated to retention and this must-have customer, this, "I'll be very disappointed," customer.

Sean Ellis (00:53:58):
Yeah. And they're at highest risk of losing them at that point. They-

Sean Ellis (00:54:00):
They're at highest risk of losing them at that point. They're probably a little skeptical about a promise that you put out there, but they're intrigued enough to want to use it. But until you get them to that must-have experience, until you kind of get them to that aha moment, they're at their high risk of being lost. And so a lot of people focus on, "Well, I better get their email address or their phone number." But then you're essentially having to reacquire them at that point. So to me, if you can collapse that time to value, I can give you a couple of incredible examples of when we [inaudible 00:54:38]

(00:54:37):
So at LogMeIn, when we initially tried to grow the business, I was stuck at being able to spend... I couldn't spend more than $10,000 per month profitably trying to grow the business. And then I dug into the data and I saw that 95% of the people signing up for LogMeIn. So LogMeIn, at the time free remote access for your computer. And so you install software and you can control it from any other computer. So 95% of the people signing up never once did a remote control session. And so not surprisingly, then I had to get my monetization off the 5% who did that was really limiting my ability to find channels that worked.

(00:55:24):
Credit our CEO with this, that I shared the data with him and he basically told the product team, "We are putting a complete freeze on the product development roadmap." So every single person from product, engineering, design and then also said to me, "Stop trying to find new channels." The three of us on the marketing side are all going to focus on improving the signup to usage rate. And so in three months, we improve the signup to usage rate by a thousand percent. So we went from only 5% of people using the product to 50%. I went back, tried the exact same channels that previously only scaled to $10,000 a month.

(00:56:05):
Now they scaled to a million dollars a month with a three-month payback on marketing dollars invested. 80% of new users were coming in through word of mouth. So there was this major inflection point by just focusing on activation.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:19):
This episode is brought to you by Merge. Product leaders, yes, like you, cringe when they hear the word integration. They're not fun for you to scope, build, launch or maintain, and integrations probably aren't what led you to product work in the first place. Lucky for you. The folks at Merge are obsessed with integrations. Their single API helps SaaS companies launch over 200 product integrations in weeks, not quarters. Think of Merge like Plaid, but for everything B2B SaaS. Organizations like Ramp, Dorada and Electric use Merge to access their customer's accounting data to reconcile bill payments, file storage data to create searchable databases in their product or HRIS data to auto-provision and de-provision access for their customer's employees.

(00:57:04):
And yes, if you need AI-ready data for your SaaS product, then Merge is the fastest way to get it. So want to solve your organization's integration dilemma once and for all? Book and attend a meeting at merge.dev/lenny and receive a $50 Amazon gift card. That's merge.dev/lenny. What do you find often works in helping increase activation? I know there's a million things that people do, but I guess what are three or four things that you think people should definitely try to help improve activation and their onboarding conversion?

Sean Ellis (00:57:40):
One of my favorite quotes is a quote from a guy Kettering, who was a hundred years ago at GM running innovation. And he says, "A problem well stated is a problem half solved." And so I think a lot of it comes down to not the things you try, but how you deeply understand the problem that's preventing someone from using your product effectively. And so I'll just give you one example. We had one channel after we made a lot of these changes and had already driven a ton of improvement in the LogMeIn onboarding. We found a demand generation channel that was really cheap and the economics looked great, but at just the download step we had a 90% drop off rate.

(00:58:26):
And so we A/B tested a bunch of different things there to try to improve that conversion rate, and then finally 10 plus tests, not able to improve it. Finally, someone said, "When these people are registering. Why don't we just ask them why they signed up and didn't download the software?" And so we didn't want to do it in too kind of a creepy way. So we made it look like a note coming from customer service. This channel was sending 200,000 people a day, so 20,000 people were converting to registering. So we had essentially 20,000 people we could email and then 18,000 of them who didn't download. And so we just asked, "Hey, notice you haven't had a chance to use the product yet.

(00:59:11):
It looked like it was coming from customer support. What happened?" And the answer we got back and not a formal survey was, "Oh, this seemed too good to be true. I didn't believe this was free." I mentioned to you we were one of the first freemium SaaS products out there. And so people were skeptical, especially in a demand gen channel where they hadn't seen a radio or a TV advertisement from our competitor who was a premium only product. These were people who were discovering the category for the first time they were getting there. Once we articulated what the problem was, our next test gave us a 300% improvement in the download rate, which was...

(00:59:54):
We gave them a choice, download a trial of the paid version or download the free version, put a big graphical check mark next to the free version. But when they saw we had a business model and a trial of a paid version, the free version was credible. And so that essentially made that channel work for us. So I think again, it's that combination of qualitative research, looking at how others did it. We had this theory, our previous company had been a game company that didn't require a download. So initially we had this theory that maybe just downloadable software can't be in the millions of new customers a month and so we're being unrealistic here.

(01:00:31):
But then we were like, "Are there any counter examples to that"? And no, the instant messengers are downloadable and they have hundreds of millions of customers, so let's study their download and install process and see if we have any ideas that we could borrow from that. So again, some inspiration, tried some of those things, it was a combination of just trying a bunch of different stuff that ultimately led to, I wouldn't say there was one big gain, it was a bunch of small gains.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:00):
Awesome. So a few things for people to try if they're like, "Hey, how do I improve my activation rate? How do I improve my conversion rate?" Just drill further into what is stopping people from progressing. Ask them, "Why did you bounce here? What did you think this was going to be? Why didn't you end up using this?" Look for inspiration from other products, I think people probably already know that. You talked about earlier this idea of the positioning, having a big impact of just figuring out.

(01:01:26):
They want an antivirus software. Let's make that very clear. "Hey we've got the best antivirus software, that's what we're here for." So there's probably just messaging that you find works a lot of times, right?

Sean Ellis (01:01:36):
I mean your two big levers on driving a conversion are increase desire, reduce friction. And so you definitely want to increase the right desire. Sometimes it can also just be reminding people along the way of what benefits you're going to get. In the case of LogmeIn, it was probably the most complicated funnel I've ever seen because you couldn't even get to the aha moment while you're sitting in front of the computer. You had to actually go to a different computer and to use the service to remote control the computer you're in front of.

(01:02:12):
So it's not surprising that there was so many steps where we could lose people, but we just weren't that intentional about designing each of those steps initially. And it wasn't until we thought through why would we lose someone at this step and studying the data, which steps were we losing the most people at? Then deeply trying to contextualize why are we losing them there, coming up with a set of tests that we want to run and then having a good way of deciding which one to test first and ultimately focusing the tests on the areas where we're losing the most people.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:45):
The other element of this is coming up with an activation metric and aligning on here's what we consider so activated. I know this is very dependent on the product, but any advice or heuristic for how to help people decide this is our activated user.

Sean Ellis (01:02:58):
I tend to start qualitatively. So just like when do I think they've had a good enough experience with the product to really know it? And so in the case of LogMeIn, it was pretty easy. If they didn't do a remote control session, they didn't use the product. There was no value along the way there. And then at least try to see if there's a correlation to long-term retention of doing that. Causation is you need to do some experimentation to prove causation. At the very least, I want to see that correlation, but if I start with two or three ideas of what it might be and then go and study the data, that can help you focus.

(01:03:41):
But again, I don't think there's necessarily one exact right answer of what is that aha moment. There might be two or three different things. I think it's that intentionality about picking something that's experience-based and saying, "What is a likely experience that someone's going to get a good enough taste of this product?" And then I do see some companies that are like, "Well, the activation moment should be, they've used it a hundred times." That's going to correlate to long-term retention, but it's just not very actionable. It's so far down the user experience.

(01:04:16):
So ideally if there's a way that I could get them there in the first session, in the first day, that's great. And so it's sort of something that's value that can be experienced super early. To give you an example from the first company I worked on was a game company, where I actually flipped it and basically instead of making a traditional funnel where they could play our games after they signed up, I made our games the advertisements. So basically we syndicated our games to 40,000 websites.

(01:04:48):
They started gameplay experience on the other website, then they would get a message that they now have a qualifying score and if they register, they'll be in the drawing for the weekly cash prize and then we could pull them into multiplayer games on the site. And so it's kind of the strategy that YouTube used to grow, but it was two years before YouTube introduced the approach.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:14):
It feels like you basically created Zynga, is what I'm hearing there. So let's move further down the funnel. So we've talked about activation, onboarding. The next phase that you focus on is basically some people call this growth loops, growth engines, flywheels. Basically it's the thing that helps your business grow and something I am curious if this resonates.

(01:05:35):
I found there's basically four ways to grow and usually one of these engines is responsible for almost all of your growth. So what I've seen is basically you're going to go through sales, you're going to grow through SEO, you're going to go through virality, word of mouth or paid growth. Does that resonate? Does that feel right?

Sean Ellis (01:05:52):
And I wouldn't say it's necessarily one or the other. I think Bounce is a really interesting example where SEO is super important for Bounce. So people who are essentially saying, "Luggage storage, Paris. Luggage storage..." Most people when they're trying to find a place to store their luggage, they're starting with Google, but at the same time, a huge percentage of the people who use Bounce are dragging their bag down a street over cobblestones in Paris. And then they pass a sign that says, "Store your bag here for $5 a day." And it's like, "Oh, no-brainer." And so 10,000 partners around the world means that there's a lot of people in the right situation on the demand gen side.

(01:06:44):
One would be, I actually think of kind of... I'm not sure how it would map to this, but demand generation versus demand harvesting. And so one of those examples would be a... Demand generation example, when you see the signs when you're passing, it's high context, right place. And then obviously the demand harvesting would be anyone who's Googling. And so they do paid search and organic search there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:10):
Interesting. I don't see that sign approach work often, but I definitely have seen it work. Like Yelp I think grew in a lot of ways of just little Yelp stickers in all the restaurant. DoorDash I think probably grows through that.

Sean Ellis (01:07:20):
I think every business could be a little bit different, but for Bounce it makes sense that that would be a really good opportunity for them.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:29):
How do you help a business figure out which area to bet on? Whether they should go paid, whether they should go SEO, whether they should hire sales. Sales is probably an easier one. B2B, you're probably going to have to be a sales team, I guess just to help them pick, "Here's where you have a big opportunity."

Sean Ellis (01:07:46):
Again, it kind of comes down as I'm going into it, I'm thinking what are the realistic customer acquisition angles for this business? And I want to have ideally two or three that I'm coming into it with, but it's going to... Obviously Dropbox is a classic one of like, "Oh man, this product..." User get user is going to be just a classic. There's file share built into it, folder collaboration. There's so many pieces of it that cross from one user to the next. But interestingly, it was fairly similar to LogMeIn in some senses, it's two businesses are solving similar problems in different ways. Where LogMeIn, we grew almost entirely off of paid search. And part of it again is that for us, we had a competitor that was spending tens of millions of dollars a month creating the category with a premium only product through radio and TV advertising. GoToMyPC, they're creating all this latent demand. And so it just made sense for us to disrupt them with a freemium service and to insert ourselves in the flow of someone... What was that thing that I heard about on the TV commercial? And now they go and they Google it and same thing, but free. So we weren't really pushing for differentiation, but just really trying to harvest that.

(01:09:15):
So I couldn't do that at Dropbox. No one was looking for when I went there. And so we tried a little bit with search to see can we make it work on cloud storage or backup or kind of going to some of these traditional categories. Cloud storage wasn't even a traditional category at that point, but backup was, and it was fairly expensive and there was just not that much demand there that way. And so it just made more sense to focus on the user get user loops at Dropbox.

(01:09:50):
I think basically for each business it's just thinking about what's unique for that business that is going to open up channel opportunities and everyone's going to be a little bit, I think jaded from whatever the last thing that worked really well. They're going to think they can apply it in the next business. But after enough times myself, I tend to get the most inspiration by just talking to customers and finding out how did they find it, how do they typically find something like that? And that starts to give me some ideas as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:28):
I think that last point is really powerful and I'm just writing it down. You said, essentially one of your tactics is talking to users, asking them how did you find this product and how do you normally find products like this? Is that the second question? I think it's similar to your [inaudible 01:21:02] test. It's such a simple question, but it's so powerful because how else will people find your product? They go to a place to find stuff like this, and I searched Google for folder sharing. There's so much there that you just skip over.

Sean Ellis (01:11:03):
I think the reason that you don't actually hear people taking the obvious route there a lot of times is because, and I used to be in the same thing, that people tend to be either over indexed on qualitative or over indexed on quantitative. So it's like analytics, I'm going to get all my answers from testing and analytics or I'm going to get all my answers from traditional customer research. And I was very much in that initial camp for the first five years of my career. I'm just going to measure everything and test the heck out of things and find stuff that works. But I had a VC who was our lead VC at LogMeIn who just said, "When was the last time you talked to a customer?"

(01:11:45):
Just pushed me to survey and talk to customers all the time. And at first I gave the smart-ass answer, "I don't care what they say, I care what they do." And he's like, "No, you got to talk to him." Then just to appease him, I would try to have a conversation every day because he was in our office a lot and so I could say, "Hey, yeah, I talked to a customer today," when he would ask me. But I started finding that my experiments were so much better the more I talked to customers, and eventually I became very much... The blend of qualitative and quantitative research leads to much better tests.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:21):
That is another amazing story and insight. It's so interesting that people sometimes think of you as growth hacker guy experiments data, when most of the advice we've been sharing so far is very qualitative driven, very survey driven, targeting customers driven.

Sean Ellis (01:12:36):
And it is just really hard to run good experiments when you can't deeply contextualize what's going on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:42):
I love this. By the way, I don't know if I knew this. So you helped develop the Dropbox referral program?

Sean Ellis (01:12:47):
I was there at the time. Basically, even when I first started talking with Drew. Before I came in, I was like, "I think the way we're going to grow this business is by leveraging the really passionate customer base and that's what we need to double down on." And we had tried a similar kind of referral program at Zabni and a friend who actually started Ring, Jamie Simonoff, previously had a company called PhoneTag way before Ring, and he had actually done a lot of the testing on double-sided referral programs and having incentive on both sides, and he found that that worked the best.

(01:13:33):
And so between what we had tested at Zabni and those conversations with him, I hadn't actually seen PayPal yet at that point, what they were doing. But that was kind of like... It seems like a referral program where we have incentives on both sides is the best way to go. Interestingly, six months before I was at Dropbox, I was at LogMeIn, and I really thought about having incentivized referrals at LogMeIn, but 80% of our new users were coming in through word of mouth. And I had a hundred million devices connected in on our system, and I was just so afraid of breaking this growth engine by adding an incentive that I didn't want to risk it.

(01:14:18):
But at Dropbox it was so early. I would still say no experiment is one person. It happened to be when I was there, I had some insights that I brought in, but ultimately... The guy who built it was actually an intern named Albert Knee and he ended up dropping out, I think, out of MIT to stay with Dropbox for a few years after that. But he was kind of my right-hand guy to collaborating on growth day to day.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:47):
Wow. I would say Dropbox is the referral program, and the PayPal referral program, as you mentioned, are the two most legendary, studied, copied referral programs out there.

Sean Ellis (01:14:56):
Unfortunately, I think that what they don't realize is that before the referral program, Dropbox had amazing referral rate. Companies that are trying to copy it are like, "Why isn't anyone talking about a product? Let's add a referral program with incentives." To me, I think it's a great accelerant when it's already working, but it can't fix it if people don't want to talk about your product.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:24):
That's an awesome point and something I was just going to ask about and just coming back to this topic of growing engagement, growing referrals as a growth mechanism, what do you look for to tell you that there's an opportunity there? And I'll just answer it, partly I've seen exactly what you just said, which is you need to already have strong word of mouth growth because referrals kind sits on that and gives you a little more incentive to share. So maybe do you agree with that, not agree to that? Any other advice on helping figure out is there some kind of loop here that we can build?

Sean Ellis (01:15:53):
Well, one thing I will say is freemium when we first started with it, as I said, we were one of the first with it, so it took me a while to figure out exactly how freemium worked, but to me, freemium towards having a free and a premium version of your product to really work in any business, it needs to be that your free product is so good that people naturally have word of mouth around that product. And then to be economically viable, you have to have a premium product that's better enough and differentiated enough that people are going to upgrade to the premium product.

(01:16:31):
But I think a lot of times people are so worried about the second part that they make the free version not very good and then they're surprised when word of mouth isn't very strong there. So I think you have to essentially have two distinct products that are great on their own. So that would be the one piece, but then obviously companies that have any kind of collaborative layer to them are going to be more likely to work well with referral. And then I think on the engagement side, a lot of it comes down to just the nature of the product.

(01:17:10):
Like Airbnb, you're not going to use it every day unless you're like a vagrant or something and then you wouldn't have money to pay for it. So there's kind a natural usage cycle to products and you want to be able to maximize against that cycle. That's where I was saying, coming back to the hooked model, I think is a really good way to help to have a framework to think about how do I improve engagement. One good counter example to that though of the natural frequency of using a product is Facebook when they change their North Star Metric from monthly active users to daily active users. I think, again, just having what gets measured gets managed.

(01:18:03):
Once Facebook was on a daily active user goal, the team suddenly had a lot more incentive to think about, "How do I bring people back every day and use this product?" Where when it was monthly active users, they kind of only got credit for that person for using once in that month. And even if they used 10 times, they didn't get 10 times the credit. It was just like a, "Oh, that's cool too." But they weren't sort of measured on that. And so I think it was sort of a random decision for Mark Zuckerberg to move from a monthly active to a daily active because they hit 1 billion monthly active users and they're like, "Okay, let's go for 1 billion daily active users."

(01:18:42):
But it had a really big impact on making that product way more addictive to the point where obviously they ended up in Congress or get a lot of pushback. I'm not sure they went to Congress for that, but they got a lot of pushback for having a product that's maybe too addictive. And the same thing carrying into Instagram and some of the other Meta products or basically anything that is highly engaging. So I do think the right incentives can actually help a team to focus on it, but there's going to be sort of a natural usage cycle to any product as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:22):
I'm glad you mentioned North Star Metrics. I actually have a post I will link to in the show notes where I collected the North Star Metrics of 30 different companies to give you some inspiration. I know this is a deep topic of its own, but just when someone is trying to pick their own North Star Metrics, which I 1000% agree, informs so much about how your company operates. It basically focuses everyone's incentives to let's drive this thing. And that changes so much of what you're building. Any just bullet point piece of advice for helping you pick your North Star Metrics?

Sean Ellis (01:19:50):
I start with the value that's uncovered through the [inaudible 01:21:02] test. So with a company, I'll say, "Okay, this is what the must have value is according to our most passionate customers, and we want to think about a metric that reflects us delivering that value." And then I'll give them kind of a framework of ways to think about a North Star Metric. But I think it's really important for it to be a time capped group conversation. And if you give a team 30 days, they'll take 30 days. If you give them six months, they'll take six months.

(01:20:25):
But I think generally a team can come up with a pretty good North Star Metric after 30 minutes if they have the right raw ingredients and a checklist of what's important in a North Star Metric. Something that's not a ratio, it's something that can be up onto the right over time. So you can keep managing it and feeling good. It should correlate to revenue growth, but revenue shouldn't be the North Star Metric, but as you grow value across your customer base, you should be able to grow revenue at the same rate. And so there's-

Sean Ellis (01:21:00):
Revenue at the same rate. And so there's some other things, but I think that would be the most important, is that it's something that could be up and to the right over time and reflects value that you're delivering to customers.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:12):
Awesome. And I was going to ask about revenue in your opinion there. And so your advice is don't make revenue or North star metric?

Sean Ellis (01:21:17):
No. Even Amazon, and again, this is just what I know of Amazon's as being but monthly purchases, but someone else might say Amazon, no Amazon's is GMV or something. But I think monthly purchases is great because it maps to value that people are getting from Amazon. And so even if I spend say $1000 on a TV set with Amazon versus $3 on a or $10 on an electric toothbrush, Amazon from the consumer's perspective delivered the same value. I needed something, Amazon helped me find that thing. And so units of value from the customer perspective I think is more important than overall revenue. But clearly with Amazon focusing on driving more monthly purchases, at least on their store side of the business, that has helped them become one of most valuable companies in the world. So I think focusing on value is, revenue should be a product of doing things. Right. It shouldn't kind of guide your day-to-day actions.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:29):
To make this even more concrete for people, are there some North star metric examples you could share that you've seen that are good? Like say for Eventbrite or Dropbox or any companies you've worked with? And I'll share one real quick as you're thinking about it. At Airbnb, our North star metric was nights booked. And so it's similar to Amazon. It's not like the money Airbnb made from bookings, but it's like nights booked and it was really, and basically every experiment ran is like, is this increasing night booked or is this decreasing night's book?

Sean Ellis (01:22:57):
And so that's a really good marketplace one. Uber obviously weekly rides. I'm always surprised with the Airbnb, that there's not a kind of time piece on it, like the weekly rides that you have with Uber, but maybe it's because it's such an infrequent use case on travel that it doesn't make sense to focus on. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:19):
Yeah. Why is the timeframe important to you? Why do you encourage that?

Sean Ellis (01:23:24):
Just daily active users, you saw the difference between monthly active users and daily active users could change behavior a lot at Facebook. It gives you a quantifiable way, if you're just kind of taking an aggregate number over time, it always looks like it's going up.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:41):
So it's an engagement element of how often are they engaging.

Sean Ellis (01:23:44):
Yeah. But,-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:46):
Any others? Any others real quick?

Sean Ellis (01:23:47):
Yeah, I mean, I didn't really think about North star metrics when I was at Dropbox and Eventbrite, like the term itself, but I was thinking about what is a valuable experience with Dropbox and how do I get people to have that more time? But I don't even know what they go with today, but maybe files in Dropbox, files access might be better than just files hosted. And then probably for Eventbrite, again, I would say weekly tickets or something like you could say weekly events, but then you have events that don't sell any tickets where weekly tickets would be more likely to reflect, events are going to be happy if they're selling tickets and yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:30):
Okay. Sean, we've gone through so much stuff. I'm trying to limit how many more questions we get through just so that we don't,-

Sean Ellis (01:24:37):
We're going long.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:38):
We're going long, which is amazing. I think there's so much value here that we're collecting for folks. So let just ask maybe a couple more quick questions. One is actually from Andrew Chen who is currently partnered at a partner at A16z. He wrote about growth for the longest time. I think he helped popularize growth hacking for better or worse with his article and it being the future of VP of what is it? Growth Hacking is the new VP of marketing, right, Is the title. So he actually had a question for you that he shared with me. His question is, growth strategies have changed a lot over the past decade. What is the biggest difference now versus when you first started working on growth?

Sean Ellis (01:25:14):
When I first started just being data-driven on customer acquisition was enough to win and being test and data-driven on customer acquisition. All the other companies were like CPM focused and so we could do really well just with lots of testing and some creativity in how it all worked. But that over time as, now I would say most online marketers are very data and test drive. They know they need to do lots of testing. And so to be competitive today, you actually have to be able to be super efficient at all parts of the business.

(01:25:57):
So again, like how you convert, retain, monetize, and that's when it gets hard. Getting a marketing team to be data and test-driven is pretty easy. Once you start getting into activation and referral and engagement and retention, now you're talking about the overlap between marketing, product if it's B2B, bringing sales in there, customer success, and those teams are not used to working together. And so it's really hard to drive the collaboration that's needed to have an effective testing program across the entire growth engine. And that's pretty much any business that's been successful with it, implemented it super early in the business, and so very few later stage companies have been able to make much progress in replicating that type of approach.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:55):
It's just gotten harder basically. Things are just getting harder.

Sean Ellis (01:26:58):
It's gotten harder, but I think it's possible. So it's what I obsess about all the time, is how do you get cross-functional teams working together on growth now? And it's still a huge advantage when you can pull it off.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:13):
Okay. Totally unrelated question, going in completely different direction as we close out our chat. So you came up with ICE, the very popular way of prioritizing work, which is crazy. I did not know that until I started prepping for this conversation. What's your thoughts on RICE, the intercom version of ICE, where R stands for reach, I believe.

Sean Ellis (01:27:35):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:35):
Thoughts?

Sean Ellis (01:27:36):
So I think it's an unnecessary addition, but maybe I'm just being protective of my original idea, that the I in ICE is impact and it's essentially saying best case scenario, how much impact could we get from this? And reach is a super important part of impact. And so I think it's already factored in the I in ICE. And so I think if there's anything that I would be accused of, it would be being over simplifying things and I'm not saying them, but there's a lot of people who approach things with, there's got to be a more complex way to approach this and that's just not me. And so yeah, more testing is better.

(01:28:21):
No, it doesn't just work like that. I mean, better tests are better than bad tests, but just if you have to hold yourself accountable to anything, more testing would be better. And so I think one just quick note on ICE is that in order to be able to effectively run a high velocity testing program, you need to be able to source ideas from across the company. And that's why I came up with ICE, that if you're having people submit ideas and you can't tell them why their idea was not chosen, they're just going to get upset and you're going to waste a lot of time. But if you have a systematic way of being able to compare ideas, it's more likely that people will be able to get it and they'll be able to come up with better ideas.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:06):
I love the way you think, Sean. I have a post on prioritization where I basically just make the same argument that there's all these complicated ways to prioritize. In the end, it's just impact, confidence, and effort and it really works and rarely is more work. On the other hand, I do also have a guest post called DRICE by these two guys called Detailed RICE, which actually I think is a really good point where sometimes it's worth spending like 30 minutes per idea to just really estimate how long will it take to avoid doing things that are just going to not work and very unlikely. So we're basically doing this reach piece and spending the time too. Right. And I think there's a lot of good value there.

Sean Ellis (01:29:45):
Yeah. And what I thinks going to be really interesting is that over time, I think AI is going to actually change our ability to model out potential outcomes on experiments and start to, whether it's a more informed way of doing ICE or replaces ICE, that ultimately probability of outcomes is something that AI will be pretty good at.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:12):
Well, amazing segue to the final question. The actually final question is I wanted to ask you about any ways you've been using AI or ways you think AI will impact the work you're doing or other folks are doing? And maybe you just answered it, but you tell me.

Sean Ellis (01:30:26):
No, I'll touch on a couple. One is that probably the funnest way that I'm using it today. Obviously I've done it for coming up with experiment ideas, but the funnest way I personally use it is I get a lot of people asking me for advice, and I don't have very much time to answer with thoughtful answers to people. And so almost every question that I get, I go to ChatGPT say, how would Sean Ellis answer this? And it gives me an initial draft to make a couple of tweaks and definitely allows me to answer a lot more. So it helps to have a book that's indexed in there and lots of writing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:07):
That is so funny, and that the question, that's as simple as the prompt is how would Sean Ellis answer,-

Sean Ellis (01:31:11):
Yeah, because then a lot of times it'll say, Sean Ellis, author of Hacking Growth dah, dah, dah, believes that, and then it'll obviously pull that part out in the answer.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:21):
Oh my God. So you're one step away from a Chrome extension or something that just automatically plugs that into your,-

Sean Ellis (01:31:26):
Yeah, exactly. And I can even start to have my personal assistant maybe start to answer some of those questions as me, but I'm a little bit afraid to send something without reviewing it first because,-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:31:37):
Absolutely.

Sean Ellis (01:31:38):
Sometimes there's stuff that's pretty different from how I would answer it, but longer term, I actually think, as I said, I think the cross-functional challenge to growth is a thing that holds a lot of companies back from being able to implement this a bit later. Mostly product teams don't want to get direction from marketing teams. Marketing teams don't want to get direction from product teams, and maybe a growth layer can help to do these things, but I find that if AI is essentially saying, you're underperforming in this area of your business, you should drive some experiments in this area. It's a lot harder to kind of let ego get in the way when it's kind of dispassionate recommendations from a system.

(01:32:22):
And so I actually think, I think the ability to come up with great experiments is going to keep growing with AI and identifying opportunities. And then obviously the analytical AI side of things is going to be really exciting in terms of being, I do find with most companies, once we get a real high velocity of experiments going, the bottleneck ends up happening more on the analysis side. And I think AI will help a lot with that as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:50):
Super cool. These are awesome examples. Okay, Sean, is there anything else you wanted to share or leave listeners with before we get to our very exciting lightning round, which we'll go through real fast? Because we've gone very long and I want to let you go.

Sean Ellis (01:33:01):
Yeah. As I've gone through and done a lot of workshops and programs with companies, I keep coming back to this advice that I heard from guy Oleg Yakubenkov, which is it often comes down to asking the right question at the right time in how you figure things out. And he's a former data scientist from Meta and so where he basically boils data science down to learning how to ask the right questions. And so I actually have a course with him called Gopractice.io, where that's really the big benefit of the course, is to learn how to ask the right questions and yeah, you learn how to query them and amplitude, but more importantly, being able to ask the right question. I think it's kind of cool to hear that from a data scientist from Meta, the importance of that.

(01:33:49):
But every time I'm going through exercises in my workshops, it almost always comes down to people who aren't able to come up with the right or a good answer in a business. It's because they're not asking the obvious question. And as soon as they have, like why aren't users downloading the software? Let's just ask them that question. That would be one example from my workshop. Who considers the product a must have? That part of getting, to figuring out the must have kind of benefit that then allows you to hone in on product market fit. And so yeah, right questions, right time I think is a really important way to think about growth and even getting to product market fit.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:34:40):
I love this advice because I think it gives us a glimpse into how your brain has developed these really seemingly simple ideas that end up being really powerful. And it feels like the advice is just think a lot about the question you need to ask because that'll get you just something that a lot of people just kind of under think or don't. There's things, maybe it's too simple.

Sean Ellis (01:35:02):
Yeah, or they just jump right into the solution side of things where they're not really trying to understand what's going on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:08):
Yeah. Yeah. Amazing. Okay, well with that, Sean, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Sean Ellis (01:35:14):
I am.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:15):
All right. Our first question is, what are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Sean Ellis (01:35:20):
Increasingly, I'm recommending a book called Presenting to Win that's been around forever, but it really helped me with my presenting. And so of course when I'm out traveling, I'm often sharing the stage with other speakers and yeah, I like to recommend that one to them. I've already talked about Muriel's Hooked. I recommend that always, and we'll just stick with two. That's good two.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:47):
Within Presenting to Win, is there one tip that sticks with you of here's something that helped me be a better presenter?

Sean Ellis (01:35:52):
Ultimately, confidence in presenting comes down to having very well organized information that you're going to present. And when you organize it correctly, you are much more likely to deliver it with confidence. And so he basically says, if I had a presentation to do and I had an hour to present, I'd spend 55 minutes creating the right presentation and then five minutes practicing it. But yeah, there's a lot more to it, but,-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:18):
Wow. Amazing. Okay. We'll link to that book in the show notes. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Sean Ellis (01:36:25):
Yeah, so I've been binging the Olympics. I love that, just watching people who worked their ass off for years and then maybe have 30 seconds to do the thing that they worked hard for. So Olympics have been awesome. And then the movie, I actually just saw Blackberry, I don't know if you've seen that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:42):
Oh, the story of the Blackberry?

Sean Ellis (01:36:45):
Yeah. I mean obviously we all kind of know the story, but it was so really, I mean, it's a classic example of product market fit and then not. Actually, it's probably even a counter example to the dangers of the how would you feel if we could no longer use this product? Pretty sure most people would've said on Blackberry, it's the keyboard, and until iPhone came along, the keyboard was super important and then suddenly it wasn't. But yeah, it's also interesting on egos and other things that everybody's getting friendly in the beginning and then egos take over and things get a lot harder later on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:23):
That was actually a really good movie. There's also an amazing movie called Tetris. For some reason, I think of these two together,-

Sean Ellis (01:37:29):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:29):
About the story of Tetris, and it's a similar parallels to those two movies.

Sean Ellis (01:37:33):
Awesome. I'll have to see that one.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:37:35):
Next question, do you have a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love?

Sean Ellis (01:37:39):
I forget the name of it, but I think or it's called Pack Gear Hanging Suitcase, and I basically like, I've done almost 100,000 miles in travel this year, and I have another trip scheduled for next week, and I love it because it basically has all my clothes folded in this little insert that goes into my suitcase, and then I just pull it out and hang it up and just makes travel way easier.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:06):
It's called the Pack Gear Suitcase?

Sean Ellis (01:38:09):
Pack Gear Hanging Suitcase Organizer.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:12):
So cool. Going to check that out. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to that you find useful in work or in life? Maybe share with friends and family sometimes.

Sean Ellis (01:38:22):
Focus on reputation and learning over earnings has served me super well that, and I'll give you an example. I had two companies when I was doing a lot of this early interim stuff yeah, 10 plus years ago, and I had two of them where I talked to the founders afterwards and I could tell they weren't that stoked on my contributions. And I offered a full refund to both of them with a thought that like I have this reputation that's, like I randomly pulled the number and said, my reputation worth $5 million. Why would I possibly mortgage that reputation for $20,000? And so one of them, I gave the check back to them and he was happy to take it, but he had said, "Oh, you can make it up to me. You don't have to give me the check, just make it up to me by continuing to help me for an unlimited amount of time going forward."

(01:39:20):
I was like, "Oh, take the check." And then the other one said, "No, no, I'm actually really happy with what you did. We're fine." But the two VCs who had made those introductions were the first two to give me term sheets when I went out to raise money for my company. And the pre-money ultimately ended up being valued at more than double what I had put my personal reputation at. So I, yeah, I think the, yeah, unfortunately the company didn't do that well itself because of the elusive product market fit challenges. But yeah, the learning there of just focus on learning and reputation. Reputation opened the door to more and more learning. And as I got more learning, the reputation grew. And so yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:04):
There's a really good corollary there with customer support. If someone just hates your product and wants a refund, just give them a refund and let them move on versus being upset.

Sean Ellis (01:40:12):
Yeah, absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:40:13):
I love that. Final question. You mentioned to me before we started recording that you were maybe indirectly responsible for TikTok's success. Maybe share that story.

Sean Ellis (01:40:24):
Yeah, I mean, I don't want to overstate it, but I yeah, my trip around the world that I did three months ago, I think I wrapped it up. I met with the original founding growth team at TikTok. They're based in Singapore and they had, I can't remember what the previous product was called, but they started with the previous product. And then when TikTok came, they were in place to be the initial growth team for TikTok, and they basically said all the early stuff we did to grow TikTok was based on your writing. So that was before the book came out.

(01:40:59):
So it's a lot of just blogging that I had done, but it was really, really cool to get that feedback that, yeah, I've always said I have some really good wins, a lot of unicorns that I helped, but none of the really, really big guys. And then to hear that, it felt really good to know that I played some kind of role in TikTok. Of course, almost the same week they told me that that was Congress having TikTok ban conversations. So it was good. And at the same time, knowing that maybe if they hadn't read my stuff, Congress wouldn't be wasting their time on TikTok bans.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:41:36):
Oh man. Bittersweet. I hope they don't pull you into some hearings. Sean, this was incredible. This was everything I was hoping it'd be. I feel like we collected so much wisdom here for folks to them figure out product market fit, find product market fit, iterate, grow their products. So happy we did this. Two final questions. Where can folks find stuff that you're up to if they want to learn more and maybe work with you in various ways? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Sean Ellis (01:42:00):
Awesome. Yeah, so Seanellis.me is the website where I kind of link to all the things that I'm doing. And so that would be one place where, and there's contact forms on there if anyone wants to reach out. Obviously LinkedIn people can contact me there. And then I did mention GoPractice. So gopractice.io. Really cool way to learn growth through a simulated environment of being able to try to grow products. So check out GoPractice and maybe go to Seanellis.me. When this comes out, I'll put a special offer on there for Lenny's listeners so you can save some money.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:36):
And there's also a LLM AI kind of,-

Sean Ellis (01:42:40):
I wasn't directly involved on that one, but there's yeah, there's some other really cool stuff that Oleg and the team are doing. Data-driven product management, and the user growth programs are the ones that I helped with.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:42:53):
Awesome. And then for folks, if they're wondering, do you do advising? How do you work with companies in case they're like, hey, I need Sean.

Sean Ellis (01:43:00):
Yeah, I mean, so the sweet spot for me on companies that I go hands-on with are ideally pretty early just after they get to product market fit and now you know how to measure it. So if you're kind of pre-scale, but you're seeing that 40%, or even if you're a bit earlier than that, we can start talking earlier. But to me, that's my favorite time to get in there, build it right from the beginning. It's so hard to retroactively do these things. And I'll go in for three to six months and I'm all in full-time, one of the team trying to really help build traction in the business. I do one of those every maybe year or maybe every year or two because I purposely burn myself out and then have fun doing more lecturing and workshops and stuff.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:43:50):
Awesome. Well, you might get a flood of requests after this comes out. Hope you're ready. Sean, thank you so much for being here.

Sean Ellis (01:43:57):
Awesome. Thank you, Lenny. I really appreciate you having me on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:44:00):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcasts.com. See you in the next episode.

Sri Batchu (00:00:00):
I do think there's actually a general path that most B2B companies take and should take. My view is you start off with founder-led sales, the early team needs to know how to actually sell. Then you hire your first couple of salespeople, then you start some very low cost targeted marketing efforts. So whether it's content, community, small scale events, and then PR, after all of that is when you start paid and brand effort and then SEO probably start around the same time that you start paid marketing efforts. The reason for the progression the way I've described it is the channels get more expensive as you go farther along and they get more effective as you understand more about your customers.

Lenny (00:00:43):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Sri Batchu. Sri was VP of Ops at Opendoor, then head of growth at Instacart, and currently he's the head of growth at Ramp, which as you'll hear at the top of the episode, is the fastest growing SaaS business and the fastest growing FinTech business in history. They hit a hundred million dollar yearly run rate in two years, which is absurd, and in the last year grew 4X during a period where most companies barely grew at all. I recently did a newsletter post on how Ramp builds product with their VP of product, Geoff Charles. And in this episode, we zeroed in on Ramp's approach to growth. We chat about what Ramp did in the early days to kickstart growth, how they mostly grow these days, how their growth team is structured, their prioritization framework plus their north star metrics.

Lenny (00:01:37):
Also, how they operationalize velocity, which is at the core of their team culture. Ramp is a really special company that is clearly on an incredible journey and I am really excited to share this glimpse into how they operate. Enjoy this episode with Sri Batchu after a short word from our sponsors. This episode is brought to you by Attio, a new type of CRM that's powerful, flexible, and built around your data. Traditional CRMs were built for a different era with totally different speed, scale, and data demands. Attio is different. It allows you to quickly build a CRM that matches your unique workflows and data structures. Within minutes of connecting your email and calendar, you'll have a CRM that's already set up complete with customer profiles and automatic data enrichment. You'll also have realtime dynamic reporting at your fingertips. No more slow deployments, outdated user experiences or tedious manual data input.

Lenny (00:02:32):
With Attio, you can build and adapt your CRM on the fly, no matter your business model or company stage. Attio is the CRM for fast-growing startups. Get started today and get 15% off your first year at attio.com/lenny. That's A-T-T-I-O.com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Coda. You've heard me talk about how Coda is the doc that brings it all together and how can help your team run smoother and be more efficient. I know this firsthand because Coda does that for me. I use Coda every day to wrangle my newsletter content calendar, my interview notes for podcasts, and to coordinate my sponsors.

Lenny (00:03:11):
More recently, I actually wrote a whole post on how Coda's product team operates and within that post they shared a dozen templates that they use internally to run their product team, including managing the roadmap, their OKR process, getting internal feedback, and essentially their whole product development process is done within Coda. If your team's work is spread out across different documents and spreadsheets and a stack of workflow tools, that's why you need Coda.

Lenny (00:03:36):
Coda puts data in one centralized location regardless of format, eliminating roadblocks that can slow your team down. Coda allows your team to operate on the same information and collaborate in one place. Take advantage of this special limited time offer just for startups. Plan up today at coda.io/lenny and get a thousand dollars startup credit on your first statement. That's C-O-D-A.io/lenny to sign up and get a startup credit of $1,000. Coda.io/lenny.

Lenny (00:04:10):
Sri, welcome to the podcast.

Sri Batchu (00:04:12):
Thank you, Lenny. Thanks for having me. I'm a huge fan and I've been following the podcast and the newsletter. So excited to be on here.

Lenny (00:04:18):
Really appreciate that. So let's talk about Ramp. So Ramp where you lead growth is apparently one of the fastest growing products in history. I believe it's the fastest growing SaaS product and business and also the fastest growing FinTech business. So first of all, is that generally true and correct?

Sri Batchu (00:04:38):
Yeah, I mean I'm sure you know of Packy and he's done a great analysis where he shared this work and compared us to a bunch of other companies and when he released this a year ago, we were the fastest growing company to a hundred million dollars of annualized revenue at the time. I don't know if there's been others since, but certainly not in the FinTech category as far as I know.

Lenny (00:04:58):
Okay. So you said the fastest growing to a hundred million. I think it took two years to get to a hundred million and run rate, right?

Sri Batchu (00:05:03):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:05:03):
That's insane because rarely is there all of this money sitting around for a company to just come in and accumulate and grab from people and provide that amount of value. So that's an insane stat. Maybe another question along these lines, is there any other just stats you could share, but just the scale of Ramp or just the speed that Ramp has grown?

Sri Batchu (00:05:23):
We publicly disclosed that last year we grew Forex on top of that, very sizable based from the year prior and Okta actually released some recent stats on fastest growing software companies among SMB and mid-market and Ramp was by far the fastest growing despite the fact that a bunch of others on the list were materially smaller. The company's still very lean for the amount of growth. We're under 500 people roughly today at that scale and that's definitely have a much higher revenue per employee than some of our other competitors and others in the space. And yeah, I mean we've got a very thoughtful and smart finance team that I've worked with actually closely our old head of strategic finance at Instacart and they set ambitious goals for us on growth and I'm happy to say we've consistently beat those ambitious goals over the last 16 months or 18 months since I've joined.

Lenny (00:06:16):
Which is especially challenging in this environment. So it's extra meaningful. Okay, so here's the big question I want to start off with. I know you weren't there at the beginning of Ramp's journey, but from what you know, what do you think the team did early on to seed this level of growth and success other than just building an awesome product that people really love? And if that's the answer, that's fine, but usually that's part of it. I'm curious just like is there some clever unique tactics that they used to help create that incredible growth from the beginning?

Sri Batchu (00:06:49):
I think you're certainly right on the product side. Obviously you've recently written about Ramp's product engine with Geoff and that there's been incredible product market fit because of the product team that deeply understood the customer experience and I think that's certainly helped initial word of mouth. One thing that I did want to point out that Ramp did that was interesting is obviously Eric and Karim, the co-founders of Ramp, were previous founders of another company that they had a successful exit on.

Sri Batchu (00:07:15):
So they had a strong reputation as founders and came in with the right set of experience to build Ramp and one of the things that they did is what I call cap table as a growth strategy where they did a great job of getting a large number of early stage founders and other influential operators and advisors onto the cap table at the company. And many of our initial customers were these companies that were on the cap table or the founders were on the cap table for. And Ramp today is actually not majority startups or tech companies anymore. The vast majority of our customers are mid-market and enterprise. That's where our revenue comes from. But there's a lot of love among the tech founder community because of the early days, both the product quality as well as all of these investors that Ramp got.

Lenny (00:08:08):
Wow. I have not heard of this strategy before and I didn't know this was actually a big part of the initial story. So is there examples of folks that they had on their cap table that are examples of folks that helped them grow initially like this?

Sri Batchu (00:08:20):
One example that I can think of is Eight Sleep founder, he's been very close to the Ramp team, same with the Pod founder and then a bunch of VC firms that are investors in the company are also customers of the company.

Lenny (00:08:32):
Do you know if the strategy there was VCs who connect them to small companies that would use Ramp or is it directly founders of companies that would immediately use Ramp?

Sri Batchu (00:08:43):
Yeah, I'll say it was more founders and executives of customers that can use Ramp. Certainly we have a fantastic group of very sophisticated investors who have made introductions to Ramp as well and that helped. But I will say that is not as big of a channel as one might expect because companies have their own decision making frameworks for selecting a product like Ramp and the investor opinion and recommendation matters, but turns out it doesn't matter maybe as much as another customer who's actually used the product that they know or are actually experiencing the product.

Lenny (00:09:17):
Amazing, awesome tactic. I've not heard of that before. In terms of growth, how much of growth of early Ramp was new customers versus expansion within existing customers? Because what's cool about credit card is people spend more, you make more money because you're taking a piece of that. So roughly how much of the growth insanity over the first couple of years was from expansion within existing customers?

Sri Batchu (00:09:39):
Obviously many of our early customers have grown quite a bit and our whole strategy is to save companies time and money so they can redeploy that in other ways for their own growth or other objectives. And we obviously are growing our product suite as well like BillPay, Flex, et cetera, where our customers can spend more money on Ramp and get more value out of Ramp. Having said all of that, what's interesting is that the vast majority of our growth back then and even to this day is via new customer acquisition. It's just we are adding so many more customers that the growth of our customers while strong and important part of our growth lever is not nearly as material as you might think.

Lenny (00:10:21):
Okay, awesome. So that's a good segue to the next question I had, which is if you're going to create a pie chart of how Ramp grows and ideally if you could even share early on and then now, how does that pie chart look? What are the slices of that pie and then what are the rough percentages of where growth comes from for Ramp?

Sri Batchu (00:10:37):
Rather than going into the specifics, one thing I'll say about the growth system today is if you were to look at what percentage of our business comes from outbound sales, paid marketing, field, and then a bunch of other channels and then you compare it against industry benchmarks, I think the secret sauce of Ramp is not that we've found a channel that's unique and that we've over-invested or under-invested. I don't think our distribution would be not that far off from looking at other companies at our size and stage.

Sri Batchu (00:11:10):
I think what we've done differently is we've really focused on making all of those investments very much driven by technology and data. And so one example that I'll give you is that our sales teams are actually incredibly efficient by any metric that we look at and we obviously benchmark them. And the reason for that is because we actually have a growth engineering team that's dedicated to supporting that efficiency but including adjusting third party data and using AI to automate much of their workflow, et cetera. And we've been doing this well before AI has become the buzzword for a lot of folks, but this is something we've had this team for almost two years now that that's been working on sales automation and data to just make our sales teams more efficient. That's just one example, but we've got similar types of mandates for every channel that we invest in and thinking about how do we inform this better customer and prospect data and how do we automate and technologize it so that we can build that competitive mode for each channel.

Lenny (00:12:13):
I'd love to learn more about this growth eng team that works with sales. How is that structured maybe as the first question and then just what are their goals? How do you measure their progress and success?

Sri Batchu (00:12:24):
A lot of companies do it differently. I think what works really well with Ramp is that we have the same shared goal, which is the pipeline driven and the payback period of the channel. It's unique to Ramp where the engineers feel ownership of the quota. They're not owning product metrics or what have you, they're obviously of course interim and input metrics that are important, but they really do feel accountable for the pipeline driven and the efficiency driven by that team. And I think that naturally allows them bottom up to come with the right projects that they think will have maximal impact on efficiency and top line.

Lenny (00:13:04):
So what are the sorts of things they do for a sales team? Is it like they help them prioritize leads or is it they help craft their messaging? Which parts are maybe most important?

Sri Batchu (00:13:15):
All of the above, helping find the right prospects, sending them the right messaging as well as prioritizing responses and drafting potential responses for the team as well.

Lenny (00:13:26):
Fascinating. How much impact have you seen that has on sales?

Sri Batchu (00:13:30):
It's incredibly helpful to our sales team and it's one of our most efficient channels as I've mentioned. So I think that there is something unique about our ability to bring technology to every channel.

Lenny (00:13:41):
Super interesting. Maybe on that topic, can you just talk about how your growth team is structured at Ramp? What are the kind of sub-teams and how do you think about?

Sri Batchu (00:13:50):
We've got an organization today that might evolve and if we get to that topic we can talk about it, but historically the way we've been organized is we've got channel based teams that are deploying spend in a given channel. So we've got a paid marketing team, a lifecycle CRM team, we've got a field marketing team, et cetera. And then we've got a product engineering team that is supporting growth and sales and helping each of these channels be more effective that's dedicated to growth. And then separate from that, we've got a small kind of what I call an innovation or skunk work type of team that works on cross-channel. Just things that don't neatly fit into a box that we think could be cool or fun to try to just do more experimentation that is cross-channel, cross-team.

Lenny (00:14:37):
Definitely sounds like the most fun team. What are some of the things they've done or work on in the skunk works team?

Sri Batchu (00:14:42):
They've done testing of new channels that don't necessarily fit into very... And that includes new online platforms. They've done some interesting stuff on TikTok and Reddit and other places, things like that. They've focused on referrals and how to make that a more delightful experience for the customers, first party events, things like that. Things that are often smaller scale and if they work we can invest more and make them larger scale later.

Lenny (00:15:16):
I love it. So the teams roughly is there's a paid growth team that just works on paid growth optimization, lifecycle CRM team basically it's like emails I imagine is a big part of that.

Sri Batchu (00:15:26):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (00:15:27):
Then there's a field sales support team and then there's the sales team, kind of eng sales team that you talked about and then I also imagine there's like a self-serve.

Sri Batchu (00:15:37):
Yeah, exactly. There's a self-serve activation eng team as well. And then of course there's SEO and website and bound lead channel management team.

Lenny (00:15:47):
And then this awesome skunk works team. I love it. Okay, so shifting a little bit, something that comes across often and consistently with Ramp, and this came across very clearly in the post that I did on how Ramp builds product with Geoff is velocity and how important velocity is at Ramp. There's this awesome quote that I'll read here from Keith Rabois who I think led many of the rounds of Ramp. He started Founders Fund, famous investor. He said that, "Ramp's product velocity is absolutely unprecedented in my 21 years working with technology businesses." So here's my question to you. Can you just talk about what that actually looks like and feels like working inside Ramp with this intense velocity?

Sri Batchu (00:16:30):
Yeah, it is a great question and Keith is amazing and then probably one of the smartest investors that I've ever had a good fortune of working with both here as well as at Opendoor, and I'll say he's absolutely right about that. And what you see internally is what I'll say is razor-sharp focus on reducing cycle time and bias to action and how do we reduce cycle time. I think it's basically the core of it culturally to me is getting people to think about smaller units of time for decision making. It seems obvious but I think you really have to reinforce it culturally. So one thing that Eric, our CEO, does, which I don't know if you've heard externally, is we have days.ramp.com where we can see how many days it's been since the founding of Ramp internally and it's day 1,529 at Ramp. He has that number of days at every board meeting, at every all hands.

Sri Batchu (00:17:28):
It's just to remind people that we don't work in years, quarters, weeks, we work in days. Each day matters and so never put out something tomorrow that you know can get done today. And that bias to action really permeates not just in the product teams but everywhere. So our growth team, which as I've just described, is extremely cross-functional, a lot of marketing folks and other expertise on the team, but we work a lot like a product team, we work on two-week sprints, we cross-prioritize across these teams and we work all together rather than in separate silos within the growth team.

Lenny (00:18:08):
So I pulled up the site you just mentioned, days.ramp.com, and not only is it days since launch, which is 1,529 when I'm looking at it, there's a many decimal points that are counting up. 1,529.43453142. Oh my god. Okay. Is that a new addition, the decimal points?

Sri Batchu (00:18:29):
No, I think that's always been there. It's just amping it up, how much time is passing. It could be stressful at times, but I think that the mitigating factor is that it's been able, as you know, A players want to work with A players attract A players and retain A players, and Ramp has done a really great job of hiring people that are fantastic that can work in this environment well and are motivated by the success and the winning from this sort of culture.

Lenny (00:18:58):
Yeah, I was actually talking to Eric about it for another piece I'm working on and he was showing me some early board decks in every deck as you said has day 544 of Ramp. So it's very real what you're talking about. Is there anything else that just as someone that came into Ramp from other traditional companies that also move really fast, Instacart and Opendoor, that is just like holy moly, this is velocity? You talked about a few things but is there anything just like holy shit?

Sri Batchu (00:19:26):
You can see the cycle time thing in terms of responsiveness from everybody at Ramp and I think typically what you tend to see is as companies get bigger, they evolve off of Slack to email and everything just moves a little bit slower and there's process and then there's obviously a lot of good parts of that but Ramp, what I noticed when I joined and true to this day is how quickly people will respond on Slack and jump on things and even if they don't complete it, there's very clear action item on who the owner will be and what the deadline will be even if it's not. And that to me was always very impressive just about... And I think it's one of those things we build in public, so everything is very visible so you can see how this is working across teams and I'm glad that we've been able to maintain that culture even as we've gotten much bigger.

Lenny (00:20:21):
There's two effects of that I imagine. One is how do you stay in the flow and get work done if you're just expected to constantly respond? How does that actually work?

Sri Batchu (00:20:31):
I don't think the expectation is necessarily that one constantly responds, but it is something that I have seen people are good at. And so I think one of the things that, again, not like a novel productivity tool, but something that Ramp does do is just trying to think about focus time and response times and using calendar blocking to really effectively manage your time that way. And then doing calendar audits of yourself as well as of your team to say, okay, what are your highest priorities for this week, this day, this month? And how does your calendar reflect your priorities? Because in many ways you ship your calendar and so thinking about how are you spending your time and then blocking your time accordingly.

Lenny (00:21:15):
And is this mostly a cultural just this is how we operate or is there a principles or sorts of processes that are set up to help people do those sorts of things?

Sri Batchu (00:21:24):
Yeah, it's cultural in terms of how we operate, but we also have templates. Our people team has a template on how to do a calendar audit properly and things like that. So we've tried to create some learning materials as well for folks that are new to get into the flow of way of working.

Lenny (00:21:45):
Awesome. Okay, so then the other elephant in the room with talking about working really fast and hard and responding really quickly is work-life balance and burnout and things like that. One thing I'll say is I believe in working really hard and working long hours as a important ingredient to success. I know there's been a bit of a backlash against that and just like, no, you shouldn't work really hard, you can be successful without doing that. I don't think that's true. So with that said, I guess what have you learned and what do you think Ramp has learned about how to find that balance and not just-

Sri Batchu (00:22:17):
Yeah. I completely agree with you. I do think, especially earlier in your career, hard work is so important both for learning but also impact and it's a tough balance that a lot of successful companies struggle with. I think my biggest learnings is it's, A, some of it is like self-selection, right? You're hiring people that are excited about doing this work and this way of working, but at least I tend to find the people that I've worked with that are highly successful, ours are not the problem. It's really autonomy, flexibility, and mission alignment and the general happiness they get from their work. And so that's what I try to focus on, which is not the hours that someone's put in, but quality of the work and the impact. And I think a big part of the push to having great results and working hard is really being grateful and appreciating the team when they do push themselves and celebrating wins.

Sri Batchu (00:23:23):
And I think we could always be doing a better job, but I think we've historically done a great job at that, at celebrating wins big and small. And I think part of the culture of building in public and open internally helps with that. So people are always sharing their wins. And then it's a very one funny stat that I don't know if other companies track is we track engagement during all hands on the Zoom to see what percentage people participate. And it's usually close to a hundred percent, like people are talking, the entire company is talking on the Zoom chat because they're excited about the wins that their friends and colleagues are shipping and the things that we're talking about in the audience.

Lenny (00:24:05):
How do you actually track engagement? Someone sitting there watching who's in the chat?

Sri Batchu (00:24:08):
No, it must be some tool our IT team can do it. It can say what percentage of participants chatted or something like that.

Lenny (00:24:15):
I see. So it's not like who's looking at the screen, it's like who's talking in the chat?

Sri Batchu (00:24:18):
Yeah, exactly. Or reacting in the chat, et cetera.

Lenny (00:24:21):
That's awesome. And it's not like you must engage, it's more just like are we delivering the content.

Sri Batchu (00:24:26):
No. And by the way, this is probably the first time I'm sharing this. I don't think brand employees necessarily know this. I don't think we've actually shared this. I just heard it from our IT person recently and I thought that was a fun stat.

Lenny (00:24:38):
I love that because it's more just like are we providing value to people or are they actually excited and interested in this sort of thing? I was going to add onto your point about how working hard and working long hours can be seen as this like, "Oh, this sucks. I wish I was at home watching Netflix," but I find that the most fulfilling parts of my career or where I was just working insanely hard for a long time, as long as that work was meaningful, exactly like you said, it was something that mattered and came out and shipped and people were excited about it and if it wasn't like, "Oh, that was a waste of my life." So that super resonates.

Sri Batchu (00:25:09):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:25:10):
I want to come back to growth for a moment. I had a couple more questions I wanted to ask here. You talked about some of these teams that you have around ways you're driving growth. Is there an area you think you're going to be investing more in over time or that you feel is working better? I know there's trade secrets here that you don't want to share necessarily, but just anything that you feel is people are maybe under-appreciating or under-investing in that you think you might invest in more?

Sri Batchu (00:25:34):
What I'll say on that front is, look, we, like everybody else, are always focused on driving more efficiency in our growth engine. There are some channels that, and we have a diversified portfolio of bets, right? One thing that's interesting about the world of growth today is I think historically people that used to run growth were folks that had a marketing or a product background. And what you're seeing these days I think are more folks like me who actually come from an investor and analytics background to lead growth teams because growth has become more and more about a diversified portfolio of bets at a reasonable ROI and building a system that's designed around experimentation and data-oriented.

Sri Batchu (00:26:22):
So the reason I say all of that is our goal is to over time, of course, make all of our channels more efficient, but also allocate more to channels that are more efficient as long as they're scalable. And so the more that we can push customer awareness via owned and earned media, the better for us. And so we've got a few different strategies on that front, but we're also working on making our other channels more efficient by the day.

Lenny (00:26:54):
So mysterious, but I appreciate you sharing what you can. The point about the portfolio of bets is interesting because if you think about it, most companies initially grow from one. You talked about growth engines, that's the same term I use. Usually there's just one thing that helps you grow initially like SEO or word of mouth or maybe paid. And then eventually every single company basically ends up doing all the growth channels and then has a team dedicated to just keep optimizing SEO, keep optimizing referrals. So I think that's a very typical path. And then it's exactly said, how do we make each of these as efficient as possible?

Sri Batchu (00:27:28):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:27:29):
Maybe as another last question around Ramp's growth. Is there any other just really surprising, interesting, really effective tactics that helped Ramp grow over time?

Sri Batchu (00:27:41):
I think one thing that's been interesting is Ramp's ability to leverage PR as a growth machine. And as you've seen, we've got a fantastic PR and comms team and we get a lot of deserved good press through that. And one thing that's been interesting is our fundraising also as a growth strategy not obviously explicitly we've got very clear goals for our fundraising, but what we have seen is anytime that we've been fundraising and we've been using that as an effective way of creating a market moment, it's driven actually a non-trivial amount of top funnel for us.

Lenny (00:28:22):
People always talk about PR being like, people over overinvest in PR, they think PR is going to be this magical growth lever, but it actually works sometimes and in my opinion, you have to have something really interesting for it to work and obviously you guys do, the company's growing like crazy, which is innately an interesting story. The founders are really important and rarely is funding like an event anymore for most companies. So I mean this says a lot that people care about your funding.

Sri Batchu (00:28:51):
What you say it is exactly right is you have to be thoughtful about your PR moments. Everybody wants to announce things about themselves that's not necessarily interesting for the press or for an audience. And so thinking about how do you compile enough value to the general audience. So our fundraising announcements usually also have some additional color on something unique about the business that we share to provide more value to readers.

Lenny (00:29:20):
And then there's also newsletter people like me and Packy you mentioned who wrote about Ramp because it's also just so interesting. What's your sense of that versus traditional PR? There's this, I don't know, big debate of just traditional media's no longer relevant. All these other people will go through newsletters and podcasts and things like that. What's your sense there?

Sri Batchu (00:29:38):
It's what are the audiences that you get with each of these tactics. And so we do both obviously get some earned coverage in these newsletters and other tactics and we pay for some and we advertise in other cases. And what we tend to find is these are great reach, but they tend to work very well for actually hiring. It improves Ramp's reputation as a company for recruiting and hiring, which helps and they help with certain audience of customers, which is typically tech founders and folks close to the tech ecosystem. But as I mentioned, the vast majority of the world is not startups and the majority of Ramp's customers are no longer tech and startups. And so as we're thinking about ways to grow. I think channels like these are one piece of the equation, but I think traditional PR will remain another really important piece because they just target a different audience.

Lenny (00:30:38):
As you're talking, I'm watching the days count up on the days that Ramp page still and stressing me out. I feel like keeping you from doing work to keep growing Ramp, but let's keep going. I'm going to close this tab. You talked about growth engines. I'm curious what you've learned about building a growth engine in a company. And another way to put it is just a repeatable scalable growth process, whether it's at Ramp or Opendoor, Instacart,

Sri Batchu (00:31:03):
People talk a lot about what should the right design of the team be or profiles of people on the team, et cetera. And I'm happy to talk about what are the right profiles of people. I think that's an important conversation. But I think design of the team, people often... I think it's a red herring about team structure and team design and what's the right one, et cetera. I think most of that is irrelevant. What actually matters is culture and rituals and cadences rather than the team itself.

Sri Batchu (00:31:35):
And so what a great growth engine and a great growth team is one that where you set the culture, set very simple north star metrics, usually one, at most two. And you've created a culture of defining hypotheses that are data driven and a culture where that can be executed quickly and have an MVP mentality for product and non-product projects where people can fail and learn quickly and iterate quickly. So I think that part of it is more important than the specific people or their functions in many ways to me, especially when you're starting to build a growth engine. It's like can you build a set of people that can generate new ideas and evaluate them effectively and move quickly is really what you're trying to design for.

Lenny (00:32:29):
Let's unpack some of this because this is great. So in terms of north star metrics, what are some examples in your experience of good north star metrics? Revenue is obviously a very common one, but often it is too high level. Do you have a sense of what a good north star metric is?

Sri Batchu (00:32:43):
I like having two. One is something around volume and growth and you want that to be, A, very motivating and intuitive for people to understand and also, B, something that the growth teams can directly impact, right? Revenue is, for better or worse, more important to the company, but also much farther down the line of whether or not the growth team can impact that. And so at Instacart, for example, our north star metric for growth was monthly active orders. And that's what we all rallied around and looked at every day, how are now doing? And then obviously we had a large growth in consumer engineering team at Instacart, 300 plus people. And so there are people working on every single corner of the app and outside of the app on acquisition to drive growth. And it's like some of the stuff is minutia, right? It's making the checkout flow slightly better or faster or something like that.

Sri Batchu (00:33:42):
So that's a good example. It's like, okay, well, so we're going to goal that team on MAO, how are they going to move monthly active orders by making the checkout flow slightly better? Maybe they can have an impact or maybe not. And so one of the things that we did is the actual local team has their own metric that they can directly influence. You want to actually hold people accountable for things that they can influence. And then we created via the finance and data team, a translation layer for every team's metric into MAO.

Sri Batchu (00:34:13):
It would be like if you got one extra weekly order because of your checkout flow from the same customer, it would have point X impact on the company's MAO and then you would just roll up all project plans as well as project impact back into this singular MAO metric. And the other benefit of doing something like that is that it also helps you cross-prioritize much easier. Should we add more engineering to this team? Should we add more budget to that team? It's like, okay, well what's the MAO map? Where is there a more MAO per dollar or per engineer being built? And it just really helped us unify and move together.

Lenny (00:34:52):
I have questions about this. This is great. By the way, why is it monthly active orders versus just monthly orders? How can you be an inactive order?

Sri Batchu (00:35:00):
Sorry, orderer.

Lenny (00:35:02):
Oh, okay.

Sri Batchu (00:35:03):
So monthly active users basically is what it is, but we call them orders because users can just log in and not order, right.

Lenny (00:35:08):
Got it.

Sri Batchu (00:35:09):
You're actually ordering on the platform.

Lenny (00:35:11):
Yeah, I think there was this backlash against users at Facebook. I think it's monthly active people and so I get it. Okay, understood. Interesting. So you find that instead of sub-teams having a different metric that we just know is good. That's one of the variables in the formula of monthly active orders. You actually have a translation that converts that specific metric moving to the north star metric.

Sri Batchu (00:35:36):
The team on their day-to-day for their sprints, whatever are looking at their own metric. But for the purpose of planning and resource allocation and reporting, we would use the translation layers to actually just look at everything on a MAO basis.

Lenny (00:35:49):
Knowing those sorts of formulas are often not perfect, how much weight do you put into that formula specifically?

Sri Batchu (00:35:56):
Yeah. And I think in general the planning process is not perfect. You can have a financial plan in Excel and the reality can diverge quite a bit. The only thing you can be certain of is that you're not going to accomplish exactly the plan. So we did a couple of things to that. One is setting a culture of we know this isn't perfect, this is like 70/30, 80/20, it's to guide. So we wouldn't use the translation factor to make a marginal decision if something is five or 10% off.

Sri Batchu (00:36:29):
Those are done based on judgment because at the end of the day, regardless of what metric framework you use, marginal decisions are marginal for a reason. They're really hard things to decide. And so the framework helped with just reducing the cognitive overload of decision making to only those that are marginal. So the ones that are obvious that are going to have big impact becomes clear even if the measurement framework isn't perfect. And so that's what we use. And the other thing that we just had as cadence is we would actually update all of the translations every six months for the new planning cycle based on new information that we knew on how moving X impacts MAO.

Lenny (00:37:10):
Just to make it even more real, what are some examples of those lower level metrics? Is it increased conversion of sign up by X percent?

Sri Batchu (00:37:17):
Any number of things. It would be actually load time of the app on open. There's a team that's trying to make that faster or more efficient because we know that that impacts whether or not the person actually ends up ordering if it takes five seconds to load versus two seconds to load. And so the full customer experience were all segregated into different teams that were optimizing just like how long does it take to open, number of searches that a user does on the app. We know the people... And number of items that are put into cart, like amount of time from cart to check out, things like that we literally just map out any user's journey throughout the app and have separate engineering teams that are focused on that.

Lenny (00:38:04):
And there's essentially some kind of regression analysis that tells you here's load times impact on MAOs.

Sri Batchu (00:38:10):
Exactly. And the other thing that we did is just so we would've these translation factors, but we could also just see what the cumulative impact of all of the work is that Facebook did this too, which is just long-term holdouts for each surface area. So the checkout experience team that I've been talking about a lot for some reason would have their own holdout. And so we could see what the cumulative impact of monthly active orders on the people that got last half's experience versus this half's experience on the holdout. And that would make it very clear. So regression is one way to do it. And then basically effective A/B test, but was a small holdout.

Lenny (00:38:46):
Is there a holdout for the performance team where someone just has a really slow version of Instacart?

Sri Batchu (00:38:51):
I wonder actually, but there's holdout for almost everything. There's a holdout for ads, for example. So there are some lucky Instacart users out there that are not getting ads and they've never gotten ads because they've always been part of Instacart's advertising holding.

Lenny (00:39:08):
That'll be a great revenue boost whenever they want to kill that holdout.

Sri Batchu (00:39:13):
Can you imagine was a conversation internally on should there be a permanent holdout? Should it be last year's experience? How should we think about, especially because it's such a important driver of modernization?

Lenny (00:39:24):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo's a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern growth team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool.

Lenny (00:39:51):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage. Eppo does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding knowing prolonged analytic cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. EPO lets you go beyond basic clickthrough metrics and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscription and payments. Eppo supports, test on the front end, on the backend, email marketing, even machine learning claims. Check out Eppo at getE-P-P-O.com. That's geteppo.com and 10X your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:40:31):
Maybe just one last question along this specific thread is this framework of having everything translated into a north star metric something you bring to every place you work now? And is this just something you recommend? For example, does Ramp approach things this way as well?

Sri Batchu (00:40:44):
I think it depends on the size of the company. I think this actually becomes much more important as companies get bigger because there's more teams to prioritize and more resources to cross-allocate. And having a common currency makes that a lot easier. And so we do something similar at Ramp as well where we have translation factors for all of the various things that the teams are doing that translate back to the north star for Ramp.

Lenny (00:41:07):
Cool. And then are you up for sharing the Ramp's north star metric or do you want to keep that part?

Sri Batchu (00:41:12):
Yeah, I mean I can tell you what we used to do in the recent past we're evolving some things and in the recent past it was for the growth team, the north star was dollars of SQL pipeline. So anything anybody did, we would try to estimate the impact into what would be the dollars of sales qualified lead pipeline generated for Ramp. So if the website team wanted to change language on the card's landing page, their direct impact would be conversion rate of email submission or something like that would be what they would be optimizing for. And then we would have, okay, what does two bips of conversion rate mean for dollars of SQL pipeline? A lot or not a lot? And depending on that, it's like, "All right, don't waste your time doing that project. Let's do something else instead." So that just helps us score and prioritize efforts.

Lenny (00:42:03):
Here's a fun story. I actually tried to sign up for Ramp when I was starting this newsletter and business and it didn't let me because I had a Gmail-

Sri Batchu (00:42:09):
For Gmail, yeah.

Lenny (00:42:13):
So I moved on and that would've been such a huge revenue opportunity. I'm just joking.

Sri Batchu (00:42:18):
I know, I know. And I'm glad you brought that up because we are obviously aware of it and we are working on something for users that have put in a personal email address. in terms of how to reengage that.

Lenny (00:42:30):
You're about to 5X growth because I had no other domain at that point. Now I have Lenny's newsletter and stuff, so it's like, "Shit, I'm stuck."

Sri Batchu (00:42:39):
By the way, for anybody else that has that problem, they can just reach out to me, we'll figure it out. The reason we don't allow personal emails is because it's just typically very low in tech users that are coming to the website that are putting in personal emails.

Lenny (00:42:51):
Makes sense. I totally get it. I was not offended. I just like, all right. I had no way around it. That's the problem. So I like that you guys are adding some path around it and you're saying email you or reach out to you.

Sri Batchu (00:43:02):
You can find me on Twitter or email me. I'm just as sribatchu@ramp.

Lenny (00:43:06):
All right. You're going to have the most sales leads of any person at Ramp when this comes up. Okay. One other thing I wanted to touch on is success metrics. You talked about one of the keys to success and this repeatable growth engine is clear success metrics. Is there any just learnings and tips you have for people when they're thinking about success metrics?

Sri Batchu (00:43:26):
Finding the right success metric, there usually should be two. There should be one on volume and another one on efficiency. And we can talk about what are good efficiency metrics and what are good volume metrics. On volume, I think the right success metric has a couple things that are important. One is there's a clear linkage to value creation for the business. So if I move this metric that will drive revenue and which will drive equity value for the business or whatever it is that this particular. Metrics and for Facebook it was MAU, for Instacart, it was effectively monthly active orders, and it's something that we know is important that will really drive the value for the business, but it needs to have the other component of it, which is it's very intuitive for all of the people working internally to the company.

Sri Batchu (00:44:17):
And it's also clear, if they're working on some minutiae, how that can impact and actually move the main metric. So it's usually you have to find something that's somewhere in between, not too far, too lag, towards revenue and value creation, but also not something that's actually translatable to the efforts of various teams.

Lenny (00:44:39):
Is there an example of a good success metric that just comes to mind to make this a little bit concrete for people?

Sri Batchu (00:44:44):
It just depends on what goal at any given time is. Sometimes you're trying to drive more users, sometimes you're trying to drive more engagement and you can reorient the company on what you're trying to do as the north star for growth during that period of time. So users, obviously we've talked about as a good one. For engagement, I've often found what really helps is, and you've done actually really good benchmarking at some point, the escape velocity metric for growth for a company, I think.

Sri Batchu (00:45:15):
I don't think you phrased it that way, but that's [inaudible 00:45:18] for a given user, which is what does it take for somebody to become an engaged and active user or customer of a platform? And at Facebook, it was 10 friends the first seven days. At Instacart, it was three orders in the first month. And at Ramp, for our activation, I mean it's very specific to Ramp, but we've got four events that the customer needs to do in the first 30 days. And if they do that, they have a high likelihood of being activated and successful. So our activation team focuses on that.

Lenny (00:45:49):
The framework you just described reminds me Gibson Biddle has this really simple framework of gem where you can basically prioritize one of three things, growth, engagement, or monetization. And his advice is always just all of them are great, just make sure you're all aligned on which one matters most at the time.

Sri Batchu (00:46:06):
Yeah. And it is very similar to, we used to have this at Opendoor, and I think DoorDash also uses a similar framework, which is speed, quality, and cost. All three are important, but it's very hard to optimize all three at the same time. So you need to have a particular prioritization. And I think growth teams can also use that as, okay, I think the way I about the growth team's journey is step one is build a system that can move fast and then work on improving the quality and then work on optimization of cost after. So you pick which phase you're on because you can't do all three at the same time, whether it's growth, engagement, monetization, or just the other way of framing on it.

Lenny (00:46:49):
Speaking of metrics, I have this note here that you're a big fan of payback period for measuring investment ROI versus CAC. Can you talk about why that is?

Sri Batchu (00:47:02):
Yeah. CAC obviously gets thrown around a lot and a lot of people are like, "Okay, you have to be reducing your CAC, CAC, CAC, CAC." There's a fundamental flaw to it which obviously is that you're focusing on cost and not the value derived. And so when you focus on CAC and reducing CAC, what tends to happen is you actually might be doing something very damaging where you're succeeding in reducing CAC, but you're actually bringing in customers that are less valuable because those are the ones that you're able to attract with a lower CAC. And so reframing it away from CAC towards LTV is helpful and that's better. So thinking about for better customers that are bigger, we want to spend more. So you might think, okay, well, LTV to CAC might be a better way of looking at that. I think the challenge with LTV to CAC especially for a lot of, even Ramp, it's only four years old, is it's really hard to predict LTV.

Sri Batchu (00:47:57):
It's like a DCF, it's extremely assumption laden and it's hard to know what the final value will be. And especially if you think your churn is low and your LTV is very high, you might end up spending a lot of money because you're like, "Oh, my LTV to CAC is great." And then a year or two into the business, you realize actually your churn is higher than you thought. Your initial customers aren't representative of your long-term retention and all of a sudden you've destroyed a lot of value by looking at LTV to CAC, which is why I'm a big, big fan of payback period and actually being really thoughtful about that using contribution margin, not revenue or gross margin, like how long of contribution margin from this customer does it take to payback their cost? And setting this obviously is typically a mandate from the executive and board level on what is the payback period that we're comfortable with, and then just orienting everybody towards driving that blended payback period down as much as possible.

Lenny (00:48:56):
For folks that aren't familiar with the concept of payback period or contribution margin, could you just briefly describe what those mean for listeners?

Sri Batchu (00:49:01):
Yeah, so contribution margin is basically the profit that you make on a given customer after you take into account all of the variable costs. So including the cost of production as well as any other variable costs to serve that customer. So that might include support and other things that scale with your revenue. And then payback period is literally just how many months of that profit would it take to pay for? Let's say it costs you $5,000 to acquire this customer and your estimated profit per month on the customer is 500. That is a 10-month payback period. So as I say that, I'm sure you've heard, you still have to make assumptions for payback period, but at least they're more based in recency and you can evaluate them more quickly.

Lenny (00:49:49):
Awesome. Thank you for doing that. Just a couple more questions around growth specifically. So there's a lot of ways to grow through the history of a company. You can invest in SEO, you can invest in paid and sales and referrals and influencer marketing, brand marketing, billboards, all these things. Do you have an opinion on how to sequence these sorts of bets for a company, especially in B2B?

Sri Batchu (00:50:10):
Of course, a lot depends on who your customers are, what your unique value propositions are and how competitive the space that you're in. But I do think there's actually a general path that most B2B companies take and should take frankly, which is my view is you start off with founder-led sales, like the early team needs to know how to actually sell, then you hire your first couple of salespeople, then you start some very low cost targeted marketing efforts. So whether it's like content, community, small scale events, and then PR. After all of that is when you start paid and brand efforts. And then SEO probably start around the same time that you start paid marketing efforts.

Sri Batchu (00:50:56):
The reason for the progression the way I've described it is the channels get more expensive as you go farther along and they get more effective as you understand more about your customers and they're more scalable as well as you go farther along the list that I've described. And so that's the intention behind sequencing in that way. SEO is a bit unique. The reason I recommend it later rather than earlier, even though it's not necessarily that expensive, is just take some time to build. And without domain authority or backlinking or any media presence, you can end up just flailing with SEO, creating content and not getting any actual traction for a long time. So there's usually a good inflection point for your company to double down on SEO efforts. And it's somewhat a little bit later than some of the other times.

Lenny (00:51:43):
This touches on a great line that you have around experimentation where you talk about how you don't want to just fail fast with an experiment. You want to fail conclusively, if that's the word. Is that right? And then can you talk about that?

Sri Batchu (00:51:57):
Yeah, I talk a lot about that with my teams both here and other places, which is we celebrate failure. Growth experiments in my history are typically 30%-ish success rate. So the vast majority of things that you try don't work. And so you want to create a culture where people aren't afraid to take risks and aren't afraid to fail. And for me, failure is not that you didn't drive revenue, failure is not learning. So it's really important that you learn when you fail. And so we celebrate failure as long as you're learning and you can only learn if you've designed the right test and you failed conclusively because otherwise, I think many of us have been in situations where there's intuition that something might work and it doesn't work, and then you end up doing it over and over for years because every time a new executive or somebody else has the same idea, you try it again and it's because you haven't been able to design the test to fail conclusively, and it's hard to do.

Sri Batchu (00:53:00):
But at the end of the day, there's only two ways to make an experiment successful. Either you have a very large M or have a very significant treatment, which is what you're doing in the experiment itself. And in B2B, you don't usually have the luxury of large M, which you do in consumer. Facebook can get stats taken in two hours. A B2B company could take two years to get the same number of touch points. And so to counteract that, I recommend people just trying to maximize the treatment effect, which is if you have a hypothesis that you're testing, just throw all of the possible tactics and resources that you think would move that needle because you can always cost rationalize later if it works.

Sri Batchu (00:53:49):
And so just maximize the treatment effect. And if with all of that it didn't work, then you can say, "Hey, we're not going to try this again because we literally did try everything that we could to test this hypothesis." And if it doesn't work in the best version and it's expensive as it is, this is not worth spending more time on. But if it does work, great, then you do another version of the test with half the tactics or whichever tactics you think work better or worse and you optimize over time.

Lenny (00:54:17):
Is there an example you could share when you did that?

Sri Batchu (00:54:19):
I mean, account based marketing is something that is very common in enterprise software where you've selected certain customers that you think are high priority and you're saying, "I want to touch them in as many nuanced ways possible to see if that drives conversion." And this is something I've seen tried many times where people do it, but they do it halfway where they're like, "Okay, tried these three things. Conversion of the control group wasn't higher. And so we think this is not going to work."

Sri Batchu (00:55:00):
And then a new go-to market executive comes and they have to do it again. They have to do it again. They have to do it again. It's a very common one wherever this happens. And so when we did it at Ramp, we did exactly what I just described, which is let's really be thoughtful about the experiment design, both in terms of maximizing the number of people as well as maximizing the number of ways and types of ways that we're effectively touching these target customers to show the value one way or the other.

Lenny (00:55:31):
So what it sounds like is the hypothesis isn't like this email will have a big impact on conversion. It's like this strategy of coming after customers is what we're testing.

Sri Batchu (00:55:43):
That's the example there. And I think for example, this kind of framework is more important for cross-functional, larger scale, bigger tests rather than an email modification. But we could even use it on a micro example, like an email modification where you are like, okay, I think this particular email is underperforming because it's not talking to this part of the customer's pain point or journey or what have you. And the simplest test would be, okay, let me make some tweaks to the text and edit that, and that could be the end of that test.

Sri Batchu (00:56:24):
And if that doesn't work, you're like, "Oh, maybe those weren't the right text edits. Let me do a different text edits or whatever." And that's fine, that's low cost. It's not the end of the world for you to be wrong there. But an alternative that you could do is like, oh, what are all of the things that I could change about this email in the same test? Is it the trigger of the email? Is it the text content of the email? Is it additional personalization? Is it the design of the email? Trying to think of what are all of the various levers that you think could be wrong and put them all together to test your hypothesis of this touchpoint is wrong and how do I improve that.

Lenny (00:57:02):
Well, obviously the downside of that is if it doesn't work, you don't know if it's like, oh, maybe it was this thing could have worked in the subject-

Sri Batchu (00:57:08):
Yeah. So there's always trade-offs on this. But what you're hoping is you've done a complete refresh where you did all the things that you thought were intuitive that should work. And if it doesn't work, then you're like, "Okay, maybe my hypothesis is wrong." But you're right. There's always going to be a challenge if maybe the execution is wrong and I did too many things potentially in that case.

Lenny (00:57:29):
How does that go with the velocity culture? Is it just do those things real fast even though it's not like micro optimize, it's like go bigger but do them fast?

Sri Batchu (00:57:39):
Yeah. Yeah. So that's why I think it's important to frame where this matters. And so I think I'm less worried about failing conclusively for things that you can fail really, really fast and just redo, right? Things like website conversion, email, et cetera. I'm more worried about that for things that take a while to plan and cost money, et cetera.

Lenny (00:58:05):
Got it. Okay. Great. Maybe one last question around growth specifically. What are some of your favorite tools for the growth team, either internally, whatever you can share, or externally that just allow you to operate efficiently and effectively?

Sri Batchu (00:58:19):
A couple of things that we've used, I mean, one simple thing is for sprint planning, actually, we use Airtable because the planning process and the scoring is so much more analytical and the translation layer. So we've got a template on how we do our sprint planning and how we translate the various impact metrics into the common currency, which I enjoy, but I don't see it has to be Airtable. It's just some form of organization that works well for that. In terms of a very tactical growth tool that we've enjoyed recently is we used this company called Mutiny, which is also around customer, which is a tool for website copy, personalization. So they hook up with our third party data sources that we pay for, and based on what we know about the customer as they're landing on our page, we can personalize, copy, and design based on that. And that's had material impact and allowed us to scale website experimentation.

Lenny (00:59:18):
Amazing. And then are there internal tools you've built to help with experimentation or I don't know, sharing data, dashboard? I don't know, is there anything else that's just like, wow, this really helps us move fast?

Sri Batchu (00:59:27):
Eric, our CEO, has publicly talked about this. I think we as a company are very thoughtful about what we build in-house versus what we buy externally. I think a lot of engineering teams are often excited about building things in-house where there's off the shelf products that could basically work externally. And Ramp has historically been good at not falling into that trap. And we use third party tools for a lot of our growth and experimentation for things that are not proprietary, strategic, et cetera, obviously. Some of the automation stuff that we've talked about, we've built all of that in-house in terms of prospecting, lead scoring, and how we talk to our customers. But for the most part, we use external tools. Instacart and Opendoor were not like that. We built our own internal experiment tracking systems, A/B testing frameworks and all of that in-house.

Lenny (01:00:25):
That's what I would've guessed about Ramp that it's with speed, you got to not build stuff you don't have to build. So that makes a lot of sense. Okay. Maybe one last topic to talk about. I want to talk about hiring. You have some really interesting approaches to how to think about hiring. One is I think you have a really interesting strategy for how to find the best companies and also the best people at each of those companies to go after if you're hiring for specific role. Can you talk about how you think about that?

Sri Batchu (01:00:51):
Gokul on Twitter has talked about some of those, which is there's two ways to go about hiring great people. One way is basically a very thoughtful and tactical network search where let's say you're hiring for a head of SEO, you go ask your network of who is the best SEO person you know, get introduction to each of those folks, and then ask them who the best person that they know is. And you have a mapping of where are the best SEO teams and why. If you can't get one of those people, 20, 30 people on your target list, you go down the list of, okay, what is the next best person? And you typically want to limit it to companies that are one to two stages of growth after you. So you want somebody that has seen your stage of growth and beyond at a company that has a reputation for craft and the field that you're looking for. So that's a very classic way of doing that, and I think that works really well for people and companies that are really well-connected.

Sri Batchu (01:01:56):
So there's another approach that I've actually used successfully is much more kind of data driven and external and not as network based, which is you can often look up data. [inaudible 01:02:14] is a lot of it is somewhat public, right? So you can look up information on which companies might be doing well. So for example, I'll just pick like if you're looking for great email marketing folks like CRM marketing lead or something like that, you can actually look up on similar web, what percentage of traffic shows up via email to companies websites. So you've got your target list of companies that are one or two stage beyond you that you respect as general companies. And you can go and see, okay, which ones of these are actually really effective at driving web traffic or app traffic or app downloads via their email. And then go try to source from those teams and companies. And I think people under-utilize that even though it's very intuitive, it's just not something that occurs to people to do.

Lenny (01:03:03):
I love that. I've not heard that tip right there. The first piece, Google definitely recommends this, and I think the core part of that is the core theme here is find the companies that are the best at the thing you're trying to hire for, and then figure out who at the company is the best once you start talking to people. I love it. Another strong opinion that I think you have is around paying people and how much to pay the best. Can you talk about that?

Sri Batchu (01:03:30):
Yeah, I think there's a lot of conversation around compensation is very much focused on equality and narrowing the gap and bands for compensation. And I think personally, I know it's a bit of a spicy take maybe, but I think it's the exact opposite direction of the conversation that companies should be having about compensation, which is I strongly, strongly believe that small teams of successful people can drive a lot more impact than larger teams of mediocre people.

Sri Batchu (01:04:05):
And so I strongly believe you have to design a system where you're able to reward 10X operators with 10X the comp. You certainly see that at the executive level. So if you look at the same executive at different companies at similar stages, the comp can be widely different based for a variety of reasons. But one of them is the perception of performance and potential by the management team. And I think people need to be thinking about how to do that across more levels, which is if you can do that, and if you do that well, I think you're able to differentially hire and retain the best talent. And that'll be a great competitive advantage for companies that can do that well.

Lenny (01:04:48):
And do you think about this within a team pay the best people the most, or is it more only hire these 10X people and then pay everyone the most?

Sri Batchu (01:04:58):
People think of the talent density of your company as dependent on hiring. And that's obviously true. It's an important part of the ecosystem and the first part, but it's equally dependent on retention and performance management. A lot of companies can be good at hiring, but hiring has pretty high rate of false positive. Interview is the worst, best way to hire somebody. And then there's lots of ways you can make the interviewing process better, make it more interactive, make it more effective, but at the end of the day, you still don't know about someone until you really work closely with the new team, with the new mandate at your company.

Sri Batchu (01:05:40):
So I think it's not about necessarily hiring [inaudible 01:05:44] operators, obviously you're looking for that, but it's also about investing in people that are doing really well and accelerating their growth and rewards based on impact once they're there and as well as managing out people directly that didn't work out. And I typically think it's almost never when I've had to part ways with people is because someone's a bad actor. It's almost always that it just wasn't the right fit for whatever reason, for their skillset, for their life goals or whatever it may be. And it just wasn't a fit for that role. And I think a lot of companies are hesitant to make those changes, and I think that's how they bring their talent bar down, frankly.

Lenny (01:06:28):
Absolutely agree. Sri, is there anything else that you wanted to touch on before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Sri Batchu (01:06:35):
I don't know how many people will use this. I'm still surprised when new folks come to me and it's like I need to write, by the way, a document of how do you work with me? Because I know it's a lot of people have been talking about, I think [inaudible 01:06:51] Johnson's talked about it too, but I say that my love languages are spreadsheets and frameworks. And one very simple one that I've always liked that sometimes people surprised to hear, but it's most consultants know is what we call MECE, mutually exclusive, collectively exhausted set of things. So whenever you're trying to attack a problem and trying to brainstorm solutions or what have you, I really like to remind the teams to think about MECE because when you think about that and evaluate your set of solutions with that framework in mind, I think you tend to find that you've catch more potential solutions and also you'll feel comfortable that you've been comprehensive in your solution development. So anyway, just a little thing for people that are earlier in their careers to not forget.

Lenny (01:07:46):
So let's make it a little bigger than a little thing. So MECE, mutually exclusive, collectively exhaustive. Is there an example of what that may look like and or visualize for people to think about what this means in practice?

Sri Batchu (01:08:00):
Yeah. I mean, I'll give it really dumb example, but that will make the point hopefully. It's like, okay, our profitability or our revenue growth has slowed down is the problem that you're trying to solve. And so okay, you start with, okay, what does this mean? You've got revenue per user has gone down, or customer has gone down, or number of customers have slowed down. Okay, that's step one of the MECE framework. Then it's like, okay, where does the revenue come from? What are all the various products that revenue could be coming from? Has it changed on any one of them? And then customers, why have customers gone down? Is it new customer acquisition? Is it activation of customers that have signed up? Is it retention? And just breaking that problem. So at each layer you've collectively exhausted all of the possible ways that this problem could have arrived. And just having that framework whenever you approach every problem will prevent you from missing something important. And also just more generally give you an others' confidence that you're being comprehensive in your solution development.

Lenny (01:09:11):
Got it. So one way to think about this in this specific case is just make a formula of all of the variables that play into the question you're trying to answer.

Sri Batchu (01:09:19):
Yeah, exactly.

Lenny (01:09:20):
Awesome. Well, Sri, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Sri Batchu (01:09:26):
Yeah, let's do it.

Lenny (01:09:28):
What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Sri Batchu (01:09:32):
I tend to find most business books can be decks, but one that I really like actually is Never Split The Difference by Chris Voss. It's a negotiation book, find it super helpful for negotiation, but also for a lot of business decision making generally, to be honest, and life. And then I'm a big fan of sci-fi short stories, so anything by Ted Chiang or Ken Liu, I highly recommend.

Lenny (01:09:57):
I love those both. On the first one I'm actually in the process of listening to it on audio and every time I'm in a place where I can negotiate something, I never remember anything that I've learned. Is there one thing that you've taken away from that book that stuck with you of like I use this?

Sri Batchu (01:10:11):
I think that the core of the book really is about listening behind the problem of negotiation and what is the person really asking for. So his example of if you're always trying to split things evenly, you'll end up with one brown shoe, one black shoe, where neither of you are happy. And so rather than thinking about BATNA and ZOPA and all the other business school frameworks on negotiation, I think focus on deep down what does this other person want and how can I change the conversation about that rather than the thing that we're arguing over.

Lenny (01:10:47):
Awesome. Great. Next question. What's a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Sri Batchu (01:10:51):
I mean, obviously it won the Oscar, but I really enjoyed Everything Everywhere All at Once. I thought it was such a wonderful story and really I think it's one of those... It's funny. The movie can also be, I think, everything because there are just so many different reads that you can get about that. It's about family, it's about immigration, it's about love. There's a lot of really interesting themes explored via one movie.

Lenny (01:11:19):
What's a favorite interview question you like to ask?

Sri Batchu (01:11:21):
I was going to say, oh, I like to ask other people.

Lenny (01:11:24):
You like to ask. What did you think I was going to ask?

Sri Batchu (01:11:26):
Oh, I thought what was my favorite interview question that you've asked or others have asked?

Lenny (01:11:30):
Oh, I got to clarify this. Both are acceptable answers.

Sri Batchu (01:11:37):
I was going to cheat on that one and say the one that you asked me right before, because I'm a big fan of actually movies and TV shows and people rarely ask about that interviews like this, but favorite interview that I'd like to ask candidates actually is what's something that you're really bad at but you still do and why?

Lenny (01:11:58):
What do you look for in their answer when you ask them?

Sri Batchu (01:12:01):
Yeah, a lot of people actually struggle with that question and can't answer anything that they do that they're bad at, which is a little bit of a yellow flag, which means that they're only used to doing things that they're successful at and they haven't cultivated interests that are not correlated to their own success at doing something. And they haven't taken the time to do that. And folks like that are going to run at the first sign of trouble and be like, "Oh, I'm not successful at this, so I'm going to move on." And what I really want to see is people that show examples of things that they're not successful at that they do for other motivations and goals and interests. And so if you can tell me a compelling story like that, it's usually a winning answer so to speak.

Lenny (01:12:43):
What is a favorite product or two that you've recently discovered that you love?

Sri Batchu (01:12:46):
Carrie mentioned Eight Sleep once in this call. I love my Eight Sleep. I'm a big fan and they're Ramp customers as well. And so that's been a great pandemic purchase. So I guess maybe not as recent. And then maybe another one is Fellow coffee, their kettles I think just designed so beautifully. I don't drink coffee, I drink tea, but I use my Fellow kettle for tea, and I think it's just a delightful product to use.

Lenny (01:13:15):
I got a Fellow kettle from my tea also, and I found that the flow of the water was too slow and it's just standing here pouring this pour over.

Sri Batchu (01:13:24):
Yeah. Yeah. So they do have a non-pour over kettle, which is what I have, which makes it easier.

Lenny (01:13:29):
Okay. My mistake. Next question. What is something relatively minor you've changed in your product development process that you found to have a big impact on your ability to execute?

Sri Batchu (01:13:42):
Yeah, I mean, I don't know if this is minor or not, but one of the things that on the growth side, we used to have separate sprint planning for the product team, for the marketing teams, and each team had their own planning cycles. And one of the things that we did is we brought them all together into one. So the lifecycle marketers joined the product activation team sprint cycles, and so their projects and work are very tightly aligned and work in the same pace and system as the rest of the product team. And that's had tremendous impact in our ability to work together.

Lenny (01:14:19):
Final question, Ramp is all about helping people save money. I'm curious if you have any tips on just saving money.

Sri Batchu (01:14:26):
I mean, it seems obvious, and I think I feel like negotiation's already been the theme of this lightning round, but everything is negotiable when it comes to contracts. People think contracts are standardized for software and usually not. People are trying to sell you something they're trying to grow too. They have their quotas to meet, they have their goals to hit. So I mean, Ramp obviously has a service for this if you wanted to scale these Ramps, but you can do this on your own. Always try to negotiate, be mindful of quarter ends for salespeople. And so if you can push something out till near the end of the quarter, you can ask for, "Hey, I'll sign it by the end of the month if you give me a 10% discount," will often work. So there's tips like that you can do, but remember that you can always negotiate.

Sri Batchu (01:15:10):
And then the second one is, I would say is just hire slower. I'm a big believer in, and Geoff talks about this too in your other interview, hiring based on slope rather than intercept, I think will work well for you and only hiring when people and teams are really stretched. I think this will serve you well both on cost and on impact. There'll be plenty of scope for the people that you hire, and as I said, I'm a big believer in small teams accomplishing more like Ramp being like a fraction of the size of some of our competitors with similar orders of revenue.

Lenny (01:15:47):
Sure. We've covered velocity, growth, hiring. So many topics, everything I was hoping we touch on. Two final questions, where can folks find you if they want to reach out and learn more and how can listeners be useful to you?

Sri Batchu (01:15:59):
Yeah, I'm a big fan of the fun place of the cesspool of Twitter, so I have a public Twitter account that you can DM me. My DMs are open, it's just my name's sri_batchu. And in terms of listeners can be useful, honestly, I think I really enjoy meeting like-minded folks, and as I may have mentioned in other places, Ramp is growing incredibly well and we're constantly looking to hire and we're still hiring. So if you know best in class growth in marketing folks that they can recommend that we hire at Ramp, I'd love to hear.

Lenny (01:16:40):
And I think the URL is ramp.com/careers. I just pulled it up.

Sri Batchu (01:16:43):
Yep, that's it. Thank you.

Lenny (01:16:47):
All right, Sri, well thank you again so much for being here and for sharing so much.

Sri Batchu (01:16:49):
Yeah, of course. Thank you.

Lenny (01:16:52):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
I think it's so underappreciated, the turnaround that has happened within LinkedIn. I check it at least 10 times a day. What was the strategy behind it?

Tomer Cohen (00:00:06):
I start backwards. It's like what is the potential here? If you start from the premise that LinkedIn ultimately is a platform for economic opportunity that sits on top of a very strong social graph. Almost every aspect of economic transaction is possible.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:20):
Is there anything tactically that would just like, wow, that really made a big dent in people wanting to come here and post, share interesting content?

Tomer Cohen (00:00:25):
To really set the new purpose for it, which was this is not a springboard for other products. This is not a traffic jumpstart, it's not an upsell feed. It's really about people that matter, talking about things that I care about professionally. The first thing we did was really making AI first.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:39):
How do you actually on the ground help people shift their perspective and think AI first?

Tomer Cohen (00:00:43):
So it wasn't like, "Oh, we have this cool technology, what can we do with it?" It was like, "Let go of what you've built. Go back to the objectives you were trying to solve and now with this technology, how can you do that objective better?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:52):
There's so much I want to dig into here. Is there anything else that you think would be interesting or useful for folks?

Tomer Cohen (00:00:57):
AI is the ultimate matchmaker. It's underutilized, it's misunderstood, it's really about...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:07):
Today my guest is Tomer Cohen. Tomer is chief product officer at LinkedIn overseeing all teams responsible for building and creating LinkedIn products and experiences, including product development, design, business development, content creation, and customer operations. During his tenure at LinkedIn, Tomer was head of the mobile team, led the effort to revamp the LinkedIn feed and to many people surprised, made it extremely interesting in a place I check regularly. And he was also at the center of shifting LinkedIn to an AI first mindset, which started way before AI became cool. In our conversation, Tomer goes inside the strategy behind the transformation of LinkedIn's feed and how they approached making it a place that people wanted to check and make it much more social.

(00:01:49):
We also get into the one mindset that Tomer credits for helping him rise so quickly within LinkedIn. Also, why Tomer's most repeated mantra is, "We might be wrong, but we are not confused." And so much more. This episode is for anyone wanting to see what great product leadership looks like and wants to be inspired to think bigger. A big thank you to Shira Gasarch, Dan Roth, Josh Redfern, and Sparsh Argawal for question suggestions that made this episode so interesting. With that, I bring you Tomer Cohen.

(00:02:24):
Tomer, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Tomer Cohen (00:02:27):
Thank you for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:28):
Absolutely, my pleasure. So as I was preparing for this podcast, I reached out to a bunch of people that have worked with you and asked them what I should ask you on this podcast, and interestingly, every single one of them said this one thing that I need to ask you, which is about this phrase that apparently you use all the time. So first of all, can you guess what this phrase might be?

Tomer Cohen (00:02:47):
I have a few. Sometimes people call them Tomerisms.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:49):
Tomerisms.

Tomer Cohen (00:02:50):
But probably I might be wrong but not confused.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:54):
That's the one. Amazing. Okay, so let's talk about this phrase.

Tomer Cohen (00:02:58):
I don't say it so much anymore. I think it's ingrained into the cultures.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:02):
I was going to say that.

Tomer Cohen (00:03:03):
When they think of me, they think of this sentence already.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:04):
Those are the ultimate things where you don't need to say them as much anymore. Okay, so the phrase again is, "We might be wrong but we're not confused."

Tomer Cohen (00:03:10):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:11):
Let's talk about this. So what does this phrase mean and why do you find it so powerful and important to say often?

Tomer Cohen (00:03:17):
Yeah, by the way, it's a simple phrase, but it has in my opinion, so much depth into that and ultimately something I really believe in. It's rooted in clarity and principles that ultimately lead to leadership. And the first time I got the inspiration from it was from a startup founder I met many, many years ago. Their company was on the brink of failure. They had their last attempt and they decided on a path forward and after they decided on a path forward, he was still seeing people hedging in different directions and it led into this confusion in the system where we decided people are still hedging, they're still trying out things they thought could work, and he realized that unless they basically all pull through in the same direction, there is no chance they'll be able to be successful.

(00:04:04):
Now, pulling through in the same direction doesn't mean you're going to be successful, but this gives you a chance of success and that confusion, the system only luck and save you. So that was when he shared that, that was very impactful for me. I think it's a good one for life as well. And for me it comes down to two main parts. One is clarity of thought and clarity of execution, and they're both equally important.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:29):
This episode is brought to you by Gamma, an entirely new way to present your ideas powered by AI. If you hate designing slides and dread that feeling of staring at a blank slide, Gamma is here to help. Just upload your PRD and turn it into a beautiful ready-to-present presentation in seconds. Gamma works with all types of formats from Google Docs, PDFs to PowerPoint. You can even drop in a link to your favorite Lenny's newsletter post and turn it into a presentation for your team. Gamma has become one of the fastest growing AI web products in the world, adding 20 million new users just this past year and is setting its sights on becoming the modern alternative to PowerPoint. Whether you have design skills or not, Gamma can save you hours of time synthesizing your ideas and shaping your content. Visit Gamma.app and use promo code Lenny to get a free month of Gamma Pro. That's G-A-M-M-A dot app.

(00:05:28):
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a SaaS app, at some point your customers will start asking for enterprise features like SAML authentication and SCIM provisioning. That's where WorkOS comes in, making it fast and painless to add enterprise features to your app. Their APIs are easy to understand so that you can ship quickly and get back to building other features. Today, hundreds of companies are already powered by WorkOS, including ones you probably know like Vercell, Webflow and Loom. WorkOS also recently acquired Warrant, the fine-grained authorization service. Warrant's product is based on a groundbreaking authorization system called Zanzibar, which was originally designed for Google to power Google Docs and YouTube. This enables fast authorization checks at enormous scale while maintaining a flexible model that can be adapted to even the most complex use cases. If you're currently looking to build role-based access control or other enterprise features like single sign-on SCIM or user management, you should consider WorkOS, it's a drop-in replacement for Auth0 and supports up to one million monthly active users for free. Check it out at WorkOS.com to learn more, that's WorkOS.com.

Tomer Cohen (00:06:46):
On the clarity of thought. What I find people to be attached to, especially when you build an environment with a lot of alpha types is that they get attached to being right or wrong and that really creates a lot of lingering in the system, a lot of confusion and they're still stuck to their ideas. And for me, I get attached to clarity and focus. I think that's much more important. That's why I think when I say I don't mind being wrong, it really comes from a humble place. I would rather go forward with everybody in the same direction than necessarily try to hedge all the time, which will give me no chance of success. The way we start, we do this in our product gens right now, is we actually spend some significant time on what is the problem we're trying to solve for, but not high level, not like, hey, we want to launch this product, we want to launch a video product.

(00:07:35):
It's exactly what type of video you're trying to launch for which audience, what is your unique criteria, what are you trying, what is very nuanced about what you're trying to solve for? Ideally, once the time you see the problem, you know exactly the problem you're trying, you actually can imagine that mountain. It's not just a mountain, you can see exactly the road, you can see exactly the end of the base camp. But then when you move to solution, I love solutions that are based on first principles. That they have, there's a principle thinking about it, there's opinions about it. If you talk to folks who work with me, they'll tell you, I push a lot for what is actually your opinion, what is your potentially controversial opinion and the best principles have teeth.

(00:08:18):
So saying that we should build a simple product for me is useless. Who doesn't want to build a simple product? But saying that I'm willing to sacrifice or trade off this, that's where I get excited. I'm like, okay, that's a very strong opinion. Let's go into that. Why were you willing to trade off those type of vectors to make it happen? And one thing that I saw also in clarity of thought was this, is I came to the US in 2008, I came from Israel. Our hobby in Israel is to argue. So we argue a lot, it's our love language in many ways. And I come to the US and I notice people say a lot like I don't exactly understand or I'm not exactly clear on this, and it took me a long time to realize they're actually disagreeing.

(00:09:03):
They're just masking it with a layer of misunderstanding and a good mentor of mine said, "Hey, just push back. Are you disagreeing or misunderstanding? If you're misunderstanding, let's spend the night. Let's get to a point where you can articulate my point of view in your words and I can do the same, but if we're disagreeing, let's stop. Why are we spending? Why wasting time just arguing it through?" So those became really powerful. That's on the clarity of thought, clarity of execution is even more important because many organizations actually reach a decision, they don't act on it, which it's one of those shocking things. They decide this is a top priority, but it doesn't make its way into the organization. And I'll give you an example. Somebody will say, "Hey, my top priority for my business is this initiative." And then I'll say, "But most of your engineers are working on this migration." And they'll say, "Yeah, we have to finish that." I'm like, "So why don't you say the migration is my number one priority?" It's like, "Yeah."

(00:10:09):
It's like, but that's exactly what you're doing. You have to make sure that what you're sharing as a priority is actually manifested in your resourcing. Then I'm like, "Hey, this is your top talent. Why is your top talent working on some moonshots that are not in your number one priority?" And they're like, "Yeah." This is where you start finding that really it doesn't really translate into execution as well and you can solve so much by just making that sure that focus is there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:36):
So the big lesson here is to push for clarity and push out anything that is unclear, confusion either in thought and also in execution. One of the folks that I talked to that worked with you about this phrase, Josh Redfern, he said that this phrase became really liberating for him, which is really interesting to hear because it forces you to make a call and to be aligned and make sure everyone is on the same page. I guess thoughts on just why this concept is so liberating.

Tomer Cohen (00:11:04):
It goes back to little alpha types or type A folks who are just so attached to not getting it wrong. When you need to move forward and it's not about being right or wrong, it's really about not being confused and making sure everybody's pulling in the same direction. That is actually really liberating. And when you know that the whole idea is to have a Socratic conversation about what you're trying to do, then coming to the table with some kind of half-baked ideas or actually not an opinion, I think actually brings into a conversation of feedback.

(00:11:39):
But you have to manifest it through, if you just play this through but then you potentially playing the right or wrong game, that's really poor. I also think it's the best way to learn. If you don't know exactly what you're doing, how can you learn back from why you made that decision? So if you had a clear understanding, ultimately it's a growing organization. This is not a one-off project. We're going to build many projects in the future. So if you're not sure about what we're trying to accomplish, how can you know what you learned from it?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:09):
I love that. So the idea here is make it very okay to be wrong, but make it not okay to be confused and not clear about here's what we're doing, here's why we're doing it. Everyone's aligned exactly on the same idea.

Tomer Cohen (00:12:19):
How can I have a product conversation if I'm not sure what you stand for? It's really hard to have a Socratic conversation, really hard to have. If you ask folks how many time you left a meeting in corporate, it could be a startup or larger companies and you are not sure exactly what was the problem discussed or what are next steps. More often than not, they'll raise their hand. That for me is a waste of building time. So actually that agitates me in another great way, but when I come in and I'm proven wrong or there's a strong challenge or argument, again that's a little bit my love language, I actually enjoy those. I think we leave the conversation much better.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:09):
You said there's some other Tomerisms, what are some others just that you can share?

Tomer Cohen (00:13:14):
This is, again, this is classic to building large organizations, but I actually believe in, especially when it comes to products, to really set ambitious goals but then try to over-deliver on them, really set what are you trying to, there's almost like the opposite where people are underplaying it and over delivering, I don't understand what you're trying to do. For me it's like we are here to make an impact. We're here to really set our goals to something really massive. And when I'm trying to visualize this, I see a mountain, you see the peak and the peak exactly how it looks like, you see base camp, you know how to start and maybe the middle of the mountain is kind of blurry, but you'll figure this out. But at least you know the peak you're trying to share, share the peak, share where you're headed to and I think it's just a much more exciting way to build product. It's a much more inspirational way for folks to be part of the product process kind of thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:07):
I was just chatting with Vlad who worked at Airbnb for many years. He was actually my former manager at Airbnb and he reported to Brian for a long time and we talked about this trait that Brian also is really good at, is just setting crazy high goals. 10 X the goal that you thought you had and what would it take and it worked really well for Airbnb. So I love that you're doubling down on the same idea. Is there an example that comes to mind of one that you, some ambitious goal you set internally at LinkedIn that people are like, "No way," and then it ended up being effective?

Tomer Cohen (00:14:35):
Actually there's a lot, when I think about our LinkedIn feed and thinking about when you started off, it was hard to imagine what that product could be because it was more of a promotional in nature product and I was like, no, is going to be a place where millions of people and not just tens of millions will come daily. And that's insane. That makes no sense based on the numbers today, but I don't start building from the numbers today. I start from [inaudible 00:15:04] I start backwards. I'm like, what this could be, what is the potential here? So how many professionals exist in their role? How many of them would love to find a place to share and engage with content? And this is my starting point. I start from there. So I don't start from the existence to set my ambition. I start from what this could be like based on really inspiration and excitement.

(00:15:30):
Again, it's not detached from reality completely, but it's also not hooked to it. But then Basecamp could be a good start. You're not asking you to make it the next day, but if you don't have that ambition, there's no way you're going to hit that. There's just no way. And there's so many products across LinkedIn. LinkedIn is a 20 plus year old company that many folks did not give it a chance in almost every phase of it. And I think if anything, it's one of those that just keeps getting better and better every year. And part of it is you keep the landmark on. This really has the potential to do so much for so many people. It's really an economic platform. So if you play from that, one billion members, that's actually pretty small where we can actually go,

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:17):
I'm so happy you went to this example. This is exactly where I wanted to take the conversation. I was very much in the camp you described of LinkedIn, how could LinkedIn possibly become a place that I want to go and browse a feed and post content? As you probably know, for the longest time it was felt like this cringey place as you said, where everyone comes and promotes themselves, "Hey, I got a promotion or here's my company's new launch." And I think it's so underappreciated the turnaround that has happened within LinkedIn. I use it, I'm a multi-day, multi-Dow user. I check it at least 10 times a day. Most of my traffic to my newsletter comes from LinkedIn, not Twitter where people think, it's absurdly underappreciated and it's I think underappreciated what it took to make this happen.

(00:17:02):
And when I saw you guys starting to try to make it a place people post content, I was like, no way, this is not going to work. Why would people want to share stuff on LinkedIn? And it's working, it's amazing. So I want to spend some time here and just try to go inside the strategy that you guys put together to here's how we're going to make this happen. Come, we've shared, you have this peak of here's what we could become. How did you actually turn this around? What was the strategy behind it?

Tomer Cohen (00:17:26):
Yeah, by the way, I'm glad you're finding great audience and traffic on LinkedIn. I think your content, actually, your content is exactly what we're trying to build for, it's expertise, it's advice, it's people you can learn from and it's also the views that really matter, not just the volume that matters. I think if we take a step back, there's so much conversation about zero to one products or scaling products, but you don't have much conversations about minus one to one products, like turnaround products. And I think there's obviously the perception of the market you have to deal with, but people I think in minus to one products, at least from my experience and we had a few at LinkedIn, pages is another one, helping businesses build their presence on LinkedIn. What you find is it's actually, most of the time it's internally harder to do because there's so much entrenched flows and processes and metrics that people are using on that specific area.

(00:18:21):
So you almost have to change the inner workings of the system to make it work. Going back to the analogy of the mountain, if you start from the premise that I deeply believe in is that LinkedIn ultimately is a platform for economic opportunity that sits on top of a very strong social graph. Then really almost every aspect of economic transaction is possible and knowledge transaction is one of the most powerful economic transactions you can have. It's the biggest accelerant for an experience and we were always very strong at helping people get a job. We have seven hires per minute, but as we were building more and more knowledge and part of it was we bought LinkedIn, we bought Lynda to make it LinkedIn Learning a while back. Today we had 140 hours of learning every minute on LinkedIn happening across the feed and LinkedIn Learning, it's pretty powerful.

(00:19:13):
And the transformation to the LinkedIn feed was exactly like you said. We actually were the first company to have a social feed, but I think we started wrong. So we started with basically activity feed. So it was like who changed what, who changed the job, who connected to who. It was more of like a tracking your network feed and it became more promotional in nature. So in a way just letting that be just naturally just moved into more of a promotional type of feed. And what we've done is we've shifted dramatically into building, actually this was one of the things I was excited about. So after I was leading the mobile team, there was no feed team, there was no unified feed team, there was no feed PM to an extent, I asked to do this role, nobody cared about it. I really believed in it.

(00:20:07):
I have strong conviction about what I could do there. And I asked to do this role and we assembled the team around it and one of the main things we've done was to really set the new purpose for it, which was this is not a springboard for other products, this is not a traffic jumpstart for, it's not an app self feed, it's really about people that matter talking about things that I care about professionally. It's about knowledge exchange. It's about how can I get the right views to the right experts in a way that actually helps them build a reputation and build their business. And then we started from there backwards. So it was basically setting that ground for that mountain peak that was nowhere to be imagined at the beginning and making our way backwards.

(00:20:55):
The first thing we did was really making AI first. So the AI team back then was completely centralized. It was not part of any product team and we brought it together with one unified AI first team. And the belief I had was ultimately the engine of the car was AI and that was almost like de-prioritized or delegated to a team that was not unified in objectives. So bring that in. And then I spent most of my time on objectives and algorithm features and data training, which led me into my passion about training product people to be a first product people. And that was a big transformation there, really shifting and we had incredible AI team, but they were completely, actually, it was a confused operation. They were building something for a whole different purpose and we were trying to aim to that mountain peak and they were putting in a different direction. No bad intent, that's what they were told to do.

(00:21:56):
So bringing it together into this SWAT team was the first thing that actually was extremely powerful, but then became the hard work. You have a product that works in a certain way and you almost want to change its DNA altogether. And it was very hard because whenever we were trying to run experiments that were mass in scale, I told you everybody was relying on the feed for their traffic. It just scared the whole system because numbers were shifting up and down and teams were freaking out about meeting their goals. And then I realized that was just spending my time in escalations instead of actually building a great product. So what I did was I carved out two million members and I said, "Those are my members. I'm going to focus on building that mountain peak. I'm going to build for them."

(00:22:45):
Full liberty and doing whatever, it doesn't hurt numbers, giving the scale and really focus on building a great experience for them. And it wasn't overnight and it wasn't over a week, but over the course of months we've seen dramatic behavior change for those members, almost like secluded, like a country of people that were seeing a different experience of LinkedIn. And once we saw that you actually had strong evidence that wow, if I bring this in, we don't need to spend time talking about how this pie gets slotted between different teams. We can actually grow the pie. The experience just manifests itself in a whole different way and that was a big change internally. It wasn't overnight, but it was really powerful in getting everybody around to see, wow, we have this cohort that is doing extremely well, which was a randomized cohort and then how we can bring it out.

(00:23:39):
I've also done some crazy things. We've done some negative tests to prove some stuff out, test for the sake of learning. When you run something that you can show that if it's just a promotional feed and you played it out organically over time, engage with the tier rates. We ran some really important ad tests as well, but we're really shown separate, almost like we carved out the different product and we showed that this could work and then we brought it out to the main experience for everybody else. And then that was, I would say the inner workings of minus one to one. Then the scanning part really became when we started to focus on professional opportunities. So when people actually share, how do they get the right views into the experience?

(00:24:19):
We don't compete for volume, we're not in the same category of Meta in terms of the skill there, but we will compete all day long for the right people seeing your content. In fact, I think in many ways that's the most powerful part of LinkedIn. How do we make sure that it's professionally productive and safe conversations? How do we trade off bad engagement all day long? In fact, when we started shifting the AI objective from click through into more downstream conversations, spammers actually took notice as well. So they were jumping over the LinkedIn bandwagon, so we had to spend a lot of time removing bad activity from LinkedIn, but that's been the evolution of this process.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:02):
That is amazing. There's so much I want to dig into here. Okay, so this two million user carve out that you did, basically everyone was just like, what the hell are you doing to our metrics and goals? You're causing all this trouble for the business. Why is this team hurting our metrics? So that was basically a group that those two million users are the only ones that saw this new updated feed and were they removed from everyone else's metrics so they weren't fluctuated as much or was it just?

Tomer Cohen (00:25:26):
They could be kept in the overall because it wasn't as important.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:29):
It was a small percent?

Tomer Cohen (00:25:30):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:30):
Okay. Got it.

Tomer Cohen (00:25:30):
But for us, they were like the world we were basically able to prove with them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:34):
Got it. Okay. That's so smart. Okay, so basically you just decided we're only going to move your metrics a little bit, worst case if we stick to it.

Tomer Cohen (00:25:41):
I felt that I tried for a few months to play on the overall experience with everybody, but it was really hard, almost like impossible because you have an organization that is so tied into how things work that I was just hitting walls after walls after escalations and it was just unproductive.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:00):
And this is before you were a chief product officer where you could have just said, "We will take this bet. We know this might hurt metrics short-term"?

Tomer Cohen (00:26:06):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:07):
Okay, got it. That makes sense. Okay, the other piece, so just like lessons I'm taking away from trying something like this that's an ambitious bet within a company, is put a PM and a team on it with a goal that feels like a core part of the success of just like somebody's ass is on the line to doing this thing.

Tomer Cohen (00:26:23):
Always.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:24):
Always, with focus on this one problem. And then there's the way you described there's this goal for this feed, but how did you actually try to turn that into a goal or metric or a KPI, what was that in the end, was there something there?

Tomer Cohen (00:26:35):
Yeah, this is an interesting one, one thing we've done actually because the feed is the first thing you land on. I can't just count how many folks engage with the feed because then I'm counting bypassers kind of thing and bystanders that are actually coming into the experience. So we actually started to look at the more, we go a lot into active, engaged and high value engagement. So we go downstream, we kind of put the onus on looking at more downstream engagement there and we build that as the feed engagement. So really trying to show that we're not just counting some overall whatever it is [inaudible 00:27:09] or sessions at the top level. That's not really helpful because any shifts can help there, but really setting targets for that. There's obviously it's a marketplace, so there's the creation side, there's the consumption side's, there's making sure that's healthy and engaging.

(00:27:23):
There was so much we went into that, but I think the best thing was it's almost like you carve out. I think when you do minus one to one, it's really hard unless the CEO says I don't care about how the company performs for the next two years, we're going to go for it. If you want to keep the site keep growing and the experience keep growing, carving out and almost like sending very specific unique metrics but then could easily be extended out once you show it was in retrospect the right way to do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:52):
And then to give people a glimpse into the way your brain works to identify this is a big opportunity. So you talk about just like I see there's a lever that we're not investing enough in and I see this big opportunity to grow of LinkedIn. How did you decide I need to go and bet on this thing and lead this team and I think feed is a huge opportunity?

Tomer Cohen (00:28:10):
I start from beliefs a lot. So I start from what do I believe this could be or where I actually came to LinkedIn this way. In fact my biggest change in my career was when I moved here and I shifted to more like what do I care about? What am I excited about? What do I have conviction on? I think it's really hard to be a strong product leader without having strong conviction about something. So I start there and in fact coming to LinkedIn as an example, when I came into lead mobile, LinkedIn was a desktop first company, then mobile team was an offshoot of entrepreneurs. I came from a startup that I ran and it wasn't a big, it wasn't, it was like, okay, I want to do mobile, I guess fine. It's like noise at this point. Same with feed. And same when I shifted into ads, I felt really strong about the ability to flip that into a great way for companies to grow.

(00:29:04):
So for me it starts with a conviction of where things could go, what do I believe in? I believe LinkedIn can be an incredible superpower and daily use case for every professional in the world. I believe knowledge sharing and knowledge exchange is the most amazing way to grow your career and to grow your business. So that needs to be a strong pillar of the experience, what didn't exist before and what is better than the feed experience, the home [inaudible 00:29:32] to actually build it. So I don't get attached to what did not work in the past. That's not, I don't know, maybe it's a mistake sometimes, but that doesn't stop me from thinking about the future.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:44):
How do you actually make time to think like this? A lot of people are listening. They're just like, "Okay, I want to think about what could this become?" Is this just the way brain works? You're always thinking what could this be? Do you set time aside to think quarterly or yearly, what could this be if we really made this amazing?

Tomer Cohen (00:30:02):
It's a good question. I haven't thought about it. It's like a process I do. I don't sit time aside for this, but I'm very reflective. I try to focus, love the conversations on the dream, what ultimately are we trying to achieve? I think LinkedIn has a great process called vision to values that started from our former CEO, Jeff Winner, which is like if you said this is for company or for a product, which is if you're successful, what change would happen in the world? Which I love. It's just a great phrase. It's just a great empowering phrase. So I actually tend to spend a lot of my time there. I'm also very optimistic in nature. Again, sometimes it's probably, I'm not best for any role perspective. You want somebody a bit more pessimistic about the future, but I tend to lead with beliefs versus evidence. I try to prove my beliefs with evidence, but I don't lead with evidence.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:59):
Awesome. Okay. And then maybe just one more tactical question about this shift that I wish I could spend hours on because it's so interesting, the success you had making the feed so engaging. Is there anything tactically that would just like wow that would really made a big dent in people wanting to come here and post and share interesting content, like a feature or a part of the strategy that really made the feed social?

Tomer Cohen (00:31:21):
I think the lesson would be, for me that was the biggest learning going into AI first that gave me the why is AI so core and why I got to make it a priority all the way to my role today to make sure the rest of the organization thinks AI first. The understanding is is that in a marketplace, if I'm able to satisfy your need on the other side, then it's magic. So ultimately it came down to AI is the ultimate matchmaker. It's underutilized, it's misunderstood, it's run separate from the team. And in a marketplace it's all about value exchange. And if I'm able to do value exchange really well, then people will come back and they do and they engage and actually they come back even more and they spend more time. So for me it was that depth into AI first as the engine that moves the whole organization forward.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:12):
Got it. So essentially making sure the content you are seeing is the most engaging you could see based on using AI to make the algorithm really smart?

Tomer Cohen (00:32:21):
On both sides. If you are the creator, if you're the person sharing, remember this was a while back, I think it was about the former Olympics and person shared an article on LinkedIn about how they should not call it Olympics, they should call it the commercial Olympics because it's all about commercials and less Olympics. And then they sent me this amazing screenshot about how NBC execs who were covering the Olympics were rearing the post, this first to them was gold. It was like, "Oh my god, my content is influencing, people are seeing it, people that matter." So that was really key. Making sure that when you share something, you share your expertise. The right people on the other side are relevant to your content and they see it. That could make your day or your week or actually it could make your living in many ways. And then on the receiving side, when I come in, it's the things I'm excited about seeing.

(00:33:17):
It's the things that are relevant, the reason your content resonates so much with other people, I can actually take your podcasts and I can apply them at work. What could be a better way to learn? I'll give you another example, which was very, very recent. I met with a known professor in this field and he shared with me how over the last year and a half he started using LinkedIn because somebody told him, "You have a great content, why don't you just post it?" I was like, "I don't want to post on social media." I'm like, "Oh, LinkedIn is different, share on LinkedIn." And he was like, "I post daily. I have so much content over the years, I post daily."

(00:33:51):
And he was like, he basically told me this is unbelievable in terms of economic opportunity I'm getting. He's like, "I'm getting speaking engagements that are roughly half the salary I make in a year here at the university. Just by people seeing this content and getting to the right people. I was invited to advise prime ministers on their investment strategy for the country and I've been teaching for 20 years, but this platform just completely elevated my ability to reach and influence people." That's the magic and that's the value exchange and that's the kind of matchmaking at scale.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:29):
Amazing. That's an awesome story. This episode is brought to you by Merge, product leaders. Yes, like you, cringe when they hear the word integration, they're not fun for you to scope, build, launch or maintain, and integrations probably aren't what led you to product work in the first place. Lucky for you, the folks at Merge are obsessed with integrations. Their single API helps SaaS companies launch over 200 product integrations in weeks, not quarters. Think of Merge like Plaid, but for everything B2B SaaS, organizations like Ramp, Dorada and Electric use Merge to access their customer's accounting data to reconcile bill payments, file storage data to create searchable databases in their product or HRIS data to auto-provision and deprovision access for their customer's employees. And yes, if you need AI ready data for your SaaS product, then Merge is the fastest way to get it. So want to solve your organization's integration dilemma once and for all? Book and attend a meeting at merge.dev/lenny and receive a $50 Amazon gift card. That's merge.dev/lenny.

(00:35:38):
I want to shift a little bit in talking about this AI first mindset that you've touched on a lot. So you talked about how at the beginning of this investment, you've already been focused on AI before it was as hot as it is today, and I've heard from many people that you're really big on getting people to shift to this mindset of being very AI first. Clearly it's worked really well at LinkedIn. I'm curious just what that actually looks like. I know you could be like, "Hey guys, we got to be AI first, AI, AI, AI." But it's different to actually make people really think differently. How do you actually on the ground help people shift their perspective and think AI first?

Tomer Cohen (00:36:14):
I can spend days on this. This is so important. It's actually so important for me, it's a key focus for me. Actually to your point, long before it became cool to talk about AI in the last two years, and in fact I think I've learned this on myself. So when it comes to the feed, I took the role of the AI product leader, it didn't exist in the company. There was no person that was ever from a product perspective thinking about AI. I think it start with the belief, like we talked about before, I think every technological revolution has dramatically changed the way we build. And AI arguably is the biggest one in our lifetimes. And when I say AI first, it's not about a tech, it's a mindset. It's a start with strategy. It is rare. Maybe now you'll see it, but it was rare two years ago to see anybody in their strategy talk about the role of AI and how they build with AI.

(00:37:02):
Then it goes to the product and then the talent itself you hire, do they actually think this way? The analogy I would give to people is imagine a river rafting boat and you have everybody on the sides holding the pedals and adding accuracy, adding speed, but there's the guide on the back and they're holding those two pedals. Those two pedals navigate pretty much the boat and those pedals are AI and the guide better be you. And in most cases in companies the guide was somebody else, it wasn't the product leader. So then the question is, if AI actually is directing your product or success and it's the biggest factor and you as the product leader is not the one holding those two pedals, what are you doing? And then I realized that it was a bit of a lack of education in that, there was actually most product users used to think of AI as this black box, magic spells that they don't know how it's working so they're delegating.

(00:38:01):
And obviously that's as far from the truth as possible, but there's so many ways to unpack it. When it came to the feed where I push for example, more specifically for the teams, he doesn't stay as an AI first, there's the objective. I would ask him, "What is the objective of the algorithm?" I would challenge you to ask folks more in the folks who are leading products specifically with algorithms inherited built into them, what is the objective of the algorithm and can you write it down for me on a board? They should be able to do so, ultimately it's a mathematical formula and then it's like what features have you added to the algorithm? And this is not user features, this is specifically what parameters to learn on and then what investment do you have in data collections and fine-tuning?

(00:38:49):
Now everybody talks a big game about fine-tuning but again, two years ago, fine-tuning was something that the product folks thought the engineering team was supposed to do. No, it's the whole organization. In fact, you can build a whole strategy just on data collection and fine-tuning and your product will see tremendous success or you can delegate it and it will never happen. So in many ways that was bringing into the fold, in our phase one, which really started around 2016 for me and every team I went to, the AI component was the area I spent most of my time on. I hired people for that. Product leaders, I spent most of my, back to how do I spend my resources, most of my resources there. And it was my top priority all the way from strategy to talent. And ultimately with the last couple of years we've seen this metamorphosis of AI and this incredible new wave and we've done a pretty big change there as well over the last two years.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:49):
I love this. So I took some notes on what you're talking about. So the big message that I'm taking away so far is as a product leader, you need to think about things that you thought the engineering leader had to think about or the ML engineer was thinking about things like what is the objective of our algorithm? What are the features that we're building into it? What is the data collection strategy? How are we fine-tuning it? As a PM, you should be asking these questions.

Tomer Cohen (00:40:13):
In fact, you should go all the way to infrastructure. You can have massive lifts in your product outcomes and goals if you probably enhance your infrastructure. How many product people talk about the infrastructure they have? Not many. Influencers, those are things ultimately your goal is to win with your products and build a much more experience to your members and customers. Literally just changing the infrastructure on top of what you build. That could be the biggest lever than you building another button or experience for your members on the top of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:45):
So say the PMs at LinkedIn, are you encouraging them all to, how is AI integrating into what you're doing? How do you just set this up so that teams do this well within LinkedIn?

Tomer Cohen (00:40:57):
Yeah. So coming into this role in early 2020, we basically established an AI academy. Every PM had to go through training just like we did mobile in 2014, we moved the whole organization to be mobile first, so everybody had to go through this process. I spent a lot of time in my reviews on the AI strategy, the objectives. We make sure there's actually AI practitioners on the product side who are strong, who can teach. So we in waves started to build more of expertise and distinguished leaders across that can actually bring this learning across the board. And then in fall 2022, when we all know what happened, at least a few months after, but we started early, we completely changed our entire almost product operations and portfolio so we can focus on this new wave of AI with LLMs in the front.

(00:41:47):
So LinkedIn has been working with AI very closely since the early days, but mostly as a matchmaker. So it was the matchmaker for our marketplaces. Somebody looks to hire this dream candidate and then you have a candidate looking for the dream job and AI would be the one doing the matchmaking. We talked about the knowledge sharing on the feed. It happens in our commerce platform as well. But AI, I was in the background so I never saw it, it was making those matches. And then with the new level of AI, we actually brought AI from the back of our marketplaces really as the matchmaker to the front. And one of the things we've done there was really asking the teams to completely revisit their entire roadmap.

(00:42:35):
This is fall of 2022, the world will learn about ChatGPT for several in March 2023. So we had a nice beginning there in terms of getting started. And the goal there was let go of what you've built, let go of your roadmap, go back to the drawing board with what are you trying to solve for, back to that idea of clarity on your problem statement and now tell me what's the solution. That's very much AI first.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:03):
It reminds me, so one of the folks I pinged about you, Shira Gasarch, she used this quote about you, "Maybe you were made for such a time as this." And it connects to a lot what you're talking about where you've been thinking a lot about. And back then it was called machine learning. It wasn't called AI for a long time and now it's AI. The fact that you've been on this so long is just a perfect synergy for now. It's working its way into everything.

Tomer Cohen (00:43:27):
Here's an example that I think sometimes to bring it to people in a more visceral way if you've been building products, product leaders are used to very much dictate the experience they're building. I want this experience to be exactly like this. I want the member to come from here and this is the options they have and I want them to be able to select this and this will be my default and I want the onboarding to progress this way. And I think this is one of the biggest shifts with this when you become an AI first leader, is that there's a realization that you don't control the experience anymore, you control the ingredients. It's almost like being a chef at the restaurant and you're used to deciding every part of the dish. You're deciding everything from the ambiance to the temperature of the broccoli and then this new technology comes in and say, just give me the ingredients, give me the guidelines of how you cook and now I'll take care of it. I'll take care of it for you.

(00:44:24):
For many folks, this is a very scary feeling, they're not used to letting go of the control. Obviously you build safety guards and responsible AI around it and that's super critical. But at the essence of it, AI is not deterministic. So giving it the rope to learn and do that experience for you ultimately would become much, much better. You have to have that belief going into it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:50):
Along those lines, I'm curious if there's anything you do to avoid, everyone's like, cool AI into everything and then all these stupid things ship, then no one wants. I saw this hilarious meme of like, oh wait, we built a kind of dumb artificial person. Let's integrate it into everything. Now it's everywhere. Is there anything you've learned about just how not to ship stuff that isn't great?

Tomer Cohen (00:45:11):
I can tell you what we've done here and we've failed a lot, but we learned so much along the way. When we started it in fall 2022, literally started with me calling the leaders coming to the room and we talked about, okay, let go of your roadmaps, like what we've done, great, but I want to let go of the roadmaps and I want to instead go back to what you're trying to solve for and let's meet in a couple of weeks and tell me how you're thinking differently about what you're trying to solve for knowing we have this technology in a role for us. So that was a starting point around just setting out some ground and principles around it. But we didn't start with new objectives to solve. So it wasn't like, "Oh, we have this cool technology, what can we do with it?" It was like go back to the objectives you were trying to solve and now with this technology, how can you do that objective better?

(00:46:00):
The second part is we actually allowed teams to run to really inspire creativity. I didn't want to contain them. I wanted to get them really excited about the potential here. And even some things we're building duplicates for a while of similar ideas but done differently because part of it was I was learning. I was very excited to see what people would come up with and see how they can do it. And there was no playbook for building this really, really well. And in many ways we were writing the playbook. Prompt engineering became a playbook internally for us, which every day was amazing. How do you cognitively reverse engineer the brain a little bit? That was incredible. In fact, a lot of things we've learned so much ahead of the market and even shared with OpenAI and shared with Microsoft. But then after that period of just everybody getting excited and building, we basically brought it down and we did top-down got it.

(00:46:53):
So we basically picked back to the objectives we had out of everything that we've seen, those for us look like the best four biggest best we want to want to aim for and we want to converge resourcing across it. So no more everybody's building whatever they want. We also, capacity is also constraint. Cost is a constraint. We want to start bringing them together. So we really much allowed people to, I would say in many words, diverge. But then I would say several weeks after converge, but we had a lot more excitement and understanding about how this thing works and what we can actually do with it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:30):
Love that advice. Basically give people a bunch of time and space to explore and experiment R and D and then as a top-down strategy, pick through this.

Tomer Cohen (00:47:40):
The top-down, we were like, there was literally, usually I do product jams for every multiple topics we have throughout the quarter. I just did every week. I just reviewed the five bets we had on a reputed basis, nothing else. Because it was so important for them to understand that this is what I care about and we had to be focused about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:00):
It feels like that space to explore and go crazy is important because otherwise people at the company are going to be like, "Oh, I wish, there's so many, this thing I want to try with AI, we should try it." And they'll just be pissed because they don't have time to work on it.

Tomer Cohen (00:48:11):
It's a great point. It wasn't my intention, but I love that you're saying it. It's a great point because I think it gives them that. I was actually, for me sometimes almost in a, maybe too much, but I try to focus on learning. I was trying. I knew just going like this, we weren't going to learn a lot, but having people come back and trying different things and slightly going crazy and pushing the boundaries, we would learn so much. So for me it was learning, but I love the motivation around, also allowing them to have the energy.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:39):
It relates to another point that a recent podcast episode I had with Brian Chesky where he introduces chaos sometimes when things are feeling too comfortable, when roadmaps, everything's calm, everything's on schedule. He's just like, "How do we do this in one day versus in two weeks? Let's just see what happens."

Tomer Cohen (00:48:56):
Yeah, because I think people get, there is just inertia, people get into their, it's human behavior, people get into their lanes, they start to feel really comfortable within the lanes, and then they don't know that there's a different way to do things and you have to almost externally invoke that or trigger that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:13):
If we think about just your career arc, I'm zooming out a little bit. You helped create the mobile experience on LinkedIn. You built the feed initially and now you're in front of AI. I could see why you're so successful at LinkedIn. I was talking to folks about your career arc at LinkedIn and you basically went from senior PM to senior PM number two, to group PM to director, to senior director to VP, to CPO in not that many years, it's a pretty meteoric rise. I wanted to spend a little time here and I want to maybe start with the question of just if you could give one specific piece of advice for someone looking to advance in their career based on what you found to be really effective, what would that be?

Tomer Cohen (00:49:53):
I realized everybody's in every stage in their career and they have different ways to think about the role then what they need. Maybe I'll just share about my journey, what worked for me instead of giving more of a general advice. First of all, I feel super fortunate I'm building. That's what I love doing. I love building, I love working with builders. Sometimes I'm like, I get paid for this, this is insane. But I love my craft and I love getting deep into it. So in many ways I think the things I'm excited about is the things I'm doing. When people are starting off, I usually really focus on learning from great people. People you talk to or have amazing mentors and managers. Some of them don't even know there were every mentors. It's not like a mentor officially. I try to pick up things from people all the time, and that's been just a remarkable experience working with great people.

(00:50:50):
And in many ways, a lot of those great people actually allowed me or empowered me to take on some bigger challenges. So I can see forks in the road where if it wasn't for that person saying something very specific, probably would've done something differently. And it just made me think a lot. So I really tried to absorb learning from great people. But by far, for me personally, again, this is very personal versus generic advice, it was when I moved here, I was an engineer for many years before I moved here for graduate school in 2008. And I always loved building, that was there from a young age but when I moved here, I realized my career path was very much dictated by one thing. It was like, what's most in demand? What's most challenging? And how do I do that? It was very childish in many ways.

(00:51:42):
It was not dictated by me, it was in a way dictated by society. So what's the toughest engineering role? What's the best company to go into? What's the best army unit to serve in? And I fell a lot along the way, but I always kept going. And then when I came here, there was a really big challenging for me personally around what do I care about? What matters most to me? And that was, again, it's very personal in many ways. It was very much for me, an impact on learning and actually how do I create impact more broadly? And I shifted 180 in how my thought process used to go. It was less about what was out there and exciting and in demand and challenging and it was more about where did I have strong conviction on, what was I passionate about and where did I feel I could make a dent and learn?

(00:52:35):
And that was my path forward. So after school with a student visa and massive school debt, I decided to start a company which was not a very intelligent decision based on my economic circumstances, but I didn't care. I was like, this is my new path. And then I got into LinkedIn. I didn't apply for a job. I met with who was in my role today, Deep Nishar, at that time and we talked and I said, "This is how I think this is how LinkedIn mobile should be built." And he was like, "Okay, how about you come and build it?" I was like, "Amazing." So I didn't apply to LinkedIn and then at LinkedIn I was always like, this is what I want to do, this is what's exciting for me and this is the dent I think I can make and this is my plan for it.

(00:53:21):
I don't know if this is a recommendation for everybody, but for me it's worked really, really well. It was really pursuing the conviction I had and my excitement and bring that to the fold with people. I do think that in products, in building product, if you're not genuinely excited about what you want to build, you don't have conviction about it, it's going to be very hard for you to make a big impact.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:45):
That's also a similar theme from my most recent podcast with Vlad of just, if you don't actually buy into the mission of the place you're working on, you're not going to have a good time.

Tomer Cohen (00:53:54):
Yeah. Say for product people, it's a very fortunate position. I always tell people, if you're in one of the most fortunate positions you can have, because if you just measure thing, for you, just measure based on your career and so on, people are going to evaluate you based on your actual work. It's a very special place. Nobody cares about your title, who cares? It's not. Maybe the company name for some people matters, but for the most part, it's about the impact you created with the products you've built. If I think about somebody's resume, I think if it was a product resume, it would be the products you built and the impact you had with it. I don't care about the companies you worked at, I don't care about the logos, I don't care about the titles. Slightly, again, not to overextend, but somebody, it's almost like an artist, right? It's like whatever, a musician, it's the albums you took out and how well they did. And I think for product people, it's a very fortunate place to be that you get measured based on the impact you had.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:53):
It sounds like a LinkedIn feature idea right there. I feel like if there's any company that could make that happen, it'd be you guys. So some of the takeaways here essentially is try to index towards what are you actually excited about and motivated to work on and driven by versus where it's the most amazing company to work at are the most challenging problem.

Tomer Cohen (00:55:17):
Yeah, I think sometimes great companies have great opportunities for you to have dent at scale, but you need to be the one doing it. If you are thinking about, I don't know, a title or that did not, once I did the change into my excitement around impact, that's been at least my yardstick. When I look at people that I talk to or interview internally, the first thing to my mind to me is like, "What did you build and what did you learn and how well did they do?" That's what I care about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:50):
I imagine there's also people on the other side where all they do is work on things that really exciting to them and they could use a little pushing towards the other direction of what's actually important in the world.

Tomer Cohen (00:55:59):
100%. If you tell me, again, everybody has their different, if you tell me, "Hey, you can work on something super exciting, but it's on the fringes of the company or you can work on something which is a bit more grindy, but it's on the core of the company." The latter, no doubt, for me, impact first.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:19):
And just listening to the story you've told of the things you decided to focus on as a clear example that you saw, hey, there's this huge opportunity in the feed, I'm going to go tackle that or mobile. So I think there's a lot of, it's kind of this Venn diagram is what I'm taking away of just what's important, what am I excited about?

Tomer Cohen (00:56:36):
Yeah, this for me. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:38):
Awesome. Okay, so I note you got to run relatively soon, so we're going to get to our very exciting lightning round. But before we do that, is there anything else that you think would be interesting or useful for folks to know or leave them with? I know we covered a bunch of things already.

Tomer Cohen (00:56:52):
Yeah. One thing that actually I've now built it into a podcast, but something I'm really excited about is I don't think there's one way of building. Remember when the Steve Jobs biography came out, everybody read it. Oh, that's the way to build and that was unique to him. And one of the things I love a lot is when I look at great builders, they're all very distinct, they're all different. And I used to do this thing internally, I used to invite product builders of different disciplines and have a fireside chat with them. And I saw people across the company join not just PMs or designers, but folks across and I build that into a podcast.

(00:57:34):
I love your podcast. Mine is very different. It's more around what is their edge a little bit. This is from the co-founder of Pixar, Ed Catmull, to the CPO of Canva or Spotify, Roblox, but all the way to a chef, Dan Barber, who's the number one chef in the US for many years. And it's just everybody has their craft and they do it differently. It's called BuildingOne, I'm excited about it. It's a little bit of a plug right now, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:03):
Please. Yeah. Where do people find it? Let's blow it up. It's called BuildingOne?

Tomer Cohen (00:58:07):
BuildingOne on Apple or Spotify.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:08):
Perfect.

Tomer Cohen (00:58:11):
It's short and it's really about showing you different disciplines from a chef to an animation director. And really the main learning there is everybody builds differently and you can be very successful, but it's very authentic to how they are personally, and it's how they push their craft to the limit. It's how well they've done their craft.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:29):
I love that. And something I super believe is just the power of focusing on your strengths and the things that make you a little different versus trying to become good at everything.

Tomer Cohen (00:58:37):
100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:38):
That's so cool. Okay, BuildOne. We'll link to it in the show notes.

Tomer Cohen (00:58:42):
BuildingOne, yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:43):
BuildingOne. BuildingOne. Okay. Amazing. And it's on all the podcasting platforms. Okay, great. With that, we've reached a very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Tomer Cohen (00:58:50):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:51):
All right. First question is, what are two or three books that you recommended most to other people?

Tomer Cohen (00:58:57):
So I have this [inaudible 00:58:58] continuously, actually it's these three.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:57):
I love that you have them right there.

Tomer Cohen (00:59:02):
I can just tell you about them but-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:03):
They look very [inaudible 00:59:04] back there. Don't [inaudible 00:59:05]

Tomer Cohen (00:59:05):
I'm not going to destroy my study. So I love fundamentals. I love studying from fundamentals. So if you're somebody who starts in your career, my fundamental books is One Mindset. It's about growth mindset. It's about basically the ability to continuously grow over time in one sentence is the whole idea is our skills, our abilities are malleable, we can completely develop them, we can build expertise and craft and mastery and it's really a mindset change. And Carol Dweck wrote the book, was also my wife's manager, and that's how we got into that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:05):
That's awesome.

Tomer Cohen (00:59:38):
So that's like our second religion at home. Second book is Thinking, Fast and Slow by Daniel Kahneman. I love behavioral economics. When I think about products, I think I always start from people, what is the member expectation? What are they trying to do? And this is the Bible for behavior. So if you're building front end products or even you're thinking about how you rally organization, it's an incredible book. Every page is like a stopper. You have to stop and think. And then lastly, and on the fundamental side is High Output Management by Andy Grove. It's like there's so much basics to doing good manager. It's like I think after you read this book, your managerial skills should start from a B. and then you can over time become an A. But beginning to a B is just a level of putting the effort in and knowing the best practices. So I think those are all fundamentally great books that I really like to give to people.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:41):
That's awesome. I love that they're right there behind you. Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Tomer Cohen (01:00:47):
Yesterday I saw Bluey, you know Bluey?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:49):
I've heard of Bluey. My kid is not old enough for it yet.

Tomer Cohen (01:00:52):
Oh, you're in for a treat.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:53):
Okay.

Tomer Cohen (01:00:54):
I love Bluey. So Bluey is this animation series from Australia and what's beautiful about it's, I can watch it with my six-year-old, nine-year-old and 12-year-old, and we're all going to enjoy it. We're all going to laugh at the same point but at the nuance of the jokes. It's like when I think about a product, the way Bluey is built, it's built for the whole family, but it's built as layers. There's layers of dialogue and points that they're trying to get across, and it's all packaged together into one experience. So for me, it's amazing that I could sit next to my six-year-old daughter, we would both laugh at this, it's a sweet animation kind of thing, it's like a family of dogs. And she would laugh at the nuance of the point, at a different nuance. For me it's like that's a genius creation of how you build a product.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:50):
Speaking of Ed Catmull, the Pixar does that really well as well.

Tomer Cohen (01:01:50):
Totally.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:56):
And I feel like the story of Bluey is really incredible too. It's just like a random little independent group and they just are making tons of money with it.

Tomer Cohen (01:02:02):
It's just amazing. The dialogue there is one, it's slightly edgy but not too edgy. It's exactly right. It's just exactly right.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:10):
Okay. Makes me want to watch it. Okay. Do you have a favorite product that you've recently discovered that you really love, whether it's physical or in digital?

Tomer Cohen (01:02:17):
So I like playing guitar. It's amateur, I'm not that good, but I love playing it. And there is a combination I've done recently I really like, there's a Spark Amp I have, which allows me to play with effects easily, but that's not what I use it for. I can tune my guitar based on the specific song I like. See, if I want to do Pink Floyd or Metallica or Nirvana or David Bowie, I can get that tune easily. I don't have to be an expert. I can just download the tune to my guitar, which is so great.

(01:02:49):
And then I couple that with the, it's called the Ultimate Guitar app, and basically it doesn't give me the chords and the tabs, it gives me the other instruments, so I can get the drums going. I can get the, it's a violin going, whatever that is that's going in the band. As somebody who does not play so well and plays for itself and nobody's supposed to listen to how I'm playing because it's really just a way for me to enjoy my time. It's just an amazing, I would never get into any band, so this is the closest I can get to get to a band. So I love that combination.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:22):
I wish we could close this podcast episode with you playing your guitar, but [inaudible 01:03:26].

Tomer Cohen (01:03:26):
I don't know if that will help the ratings of the show.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:29):
No, man, that's amazing. Okay, two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often repeat yourself, find really useful in work or in life, share with folks?

Tomer Cohen (01:03:38):
From growth mindset there's a motto that I really like. It's called becoming is better than being. It's like the moment you think you achieved something is the moment you start to deteriorate down. It's like we're really trying to grow as human beings. We're trying to learn, we're trying to evolve. Product is a good example. I think the moment you think you actually mastered it is the moment that you become obsolete. So I love the idea that becoming is a better goal than continuously trying to reach some kind of level.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:06):
Love that. Final question, just to come back to LinkedIn. Is there a fun feature of LinkedIn people don't know about or should check out? Is there anything new that's like, oh, that's something you should try or that's something that might surprise you about LinkedIn these days?

Tomer Cohen (01:04:19):
Maybe I'll give a couple so I don't have to pick the best right off the bat. But one right now, we're heavily invested in video and it's doing so well for those creators. We talked about it like immersive video we can actually come in. We talked about for us, video is obviously a best practice right now in the industry, but on LinkedIn, the right views really matter. So highly encourage creators to think about their video play at LinkedIn. And then I think what we call our coach experience in some cases is so powerful. For job seekers out there, we have people hired on LinkedIn, there's like seven folks hired every minute. Job seeking is a lonely journey.

(01:05:02):
I was actually in a session recently meeting with job seekers and I was talking to them and one started crying midway into the session because they said, "I cannot share my journey with anybody because I feel like I'm alone in this. People don't get how hard it is. I feel very accomplished, but I can't get the job. And I wish there was a buddy, I wish there was something that I could talk to brainstorm with who wouldn't judge me, who would just be trying to help me without paying hundreds of dollars to a coach of some sort. I don't have that money."

(01:05:38):
And in many ways, when we walked him through the job seeking experience, the coach experience, we build this coach aspect where you can go to any job and you can riff on the job with this really new realities LLM that is tailored to you, personalized to you, private to you, everything from your fit to how to best apply, to consulting about different opportunities, to comparing this to others, to feeling supported. So when we talk to people around, we always, I love to measure the impact of our work by emotion, when we talk to job seekers after that, it was basically the sense of I felt supported. In many ways, getting to that ability to remove the loneliness is amazing. It's a little bit like people need to, we're making it more and more visible and more and more ramped to everybody to a certain point. But that's a really powerful way to just humanize the job seeking experience for everybody.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:37):
Awesome. And to find that it's just, is it called LinkedIn Coach or?

Tomer Cohen (01:06:40):
It's in the job. So if you go to the job tab on LinkedIn, actually just a few weeks ago, we just put it on the top. So you don't have to go to the specific job and find it, you can just start there and engage with it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:50):
Awesome. Just to give a quick plug to a future podcast that's coming out, there's this book called Never Search Alone, that we're going to have the author on the podcast soon. And it's all about the same idea of having a buddy that helps you search for a job.

Tomer Cohen (01:07:01):
Yeah. When I think about the future of AI in the sense of belief, that relationship is going to be sacred, the relationship between AI and the human is going to be [inaudible 01:07:10]. Do you know what Nomophobia means?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:11):
Nomaphobia? No.

Tomer Cohen (01:07:14):
Nomophobia.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:15):
Nomophobia. No. Being afraid of something.

Tomer Cohen (01:07:18):
It's the anxiety of being away from your phone.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:18):
I have that.

Tomer Cohen (01:07:25):
I think we all. I think we're in for AI-nophobia at that point, where you're going to get to a point where AI is going to feel so intimate, so personal that it would actually feel concerning to you to be away from it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:37):
Oh man, there reminds me of Friend.com, which just launched in a really fun, I don't know if you saw Friend.com, their launch video.

Tomer Cohen (01:07:44):
No, I did not.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:45):
Oh, man. Check out Friend.com. It's like a digital friend that just is with you all the time and you're talking to him and it's an AI.

Tomer Cohen (01:07:50):
Oh, we're just getting started. There's going to be, we're in for incredible revolution there.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:55):
I'm excited and scared at the same time. Tomer, thank you so much for being here. This was amazing. You're awesome. Two final questions. Where can folks check out stuff that you're working on? You have a course also, you have a podcast, so just give people a sense of where to find that.

Tomer Cohen (01:08:07):
Awesome. So obviously I'm on LinkedIn, reach out anytime. I read everything people send to me. I don't always reply to everything, but I read everything sent to me. And then if you want to go deep on AI first, I have two courses, they're free. I think it's a phenomenal way for you to build or starting to build your expertise, especially if you're in product. It's a great way to go deeper and not just stay on the high level parts of things.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:36):
Amazing. We'll link to all those things in the show notes. Tomer, thank you so much for being here.

Tomer Cohen (01:08:40):
Lenny. Thank you. It's our pleasure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:42):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at Lennyspodcasts.com. See you in the next episode.

Yuriy Timen (00:00:00):
The only thing that's worse than a channel or a tactic that you tried not working. The only thing that's worse now is when you didn't give it the appropriate shot, right? And you prematurely were erroneously concluded that it doesn't work and it's remarkable how often you find that to be the case when I talk to companies, "Oh, YouTube, we tried it. It doesn't work." I'm like, "Okay, can I see what you've tried?" And then you look at it and you're like, "Oh, this thing was not designed to even have a shot at working from the get go."

Lenny (00:00:40):
Yuriy Timen is a full-time advisor to companies looking to figure out their growth strategy. He's worked with companies like Canva, Airtable, Otter, Whimsical, Hims, Flow Health, and a dozen others. I know a number of founders who have worked with Yuriy and they all tell me that he transformed how they think about their growth. Before becoming an advisor, he spent nine years at Grammarly where he led growth in marketing and helped turn that into the household name that it is today.

Lenny (00:01:07):
In our chat, we get incredibly tactical about all of the ways that you can grow your product, including when and how to invest in virality, SEO, and paid growth. What's changing across each of those channels and the most common failure modes for B2C startups. This is the most tactical and actionable conversation I have had yet on how to grow your product, particularly a subscription product. And I'm really excited for you to hear it. With that I bring you Yuriy Timen.

Lenny (00:01:36):
Hey, Ashley, head of marketing and Flat File. How many B2B SAS companies would you estimate B to import CSV files from their customers?

Ashley (00:01:44):
At least 40%?

Lenny (00:01:46):
And how many of them screw that up and what happens when they do?

Ashley (00:01:49):
Well, based on our data, about a third of people will consider switching to another company after just one bad experience during onboarding. So if your CSV importer doesn't work right, which is super common, considering customer files are chalk full of unexpected data and formatting they'll leave.

Lenny (00:02:08):
I am 0% surprised to hear that. I've consistently seen that improving onboarding is one of the highest leverage opportunities for both signup, conversion and increasing long term retention. Getting people to your aha moment more quickly and reliably is so incredibly important.

Ashley (00:02:23):
Totally. It's incredible to see how our customers like Square, Spotify, and Zuora are able to grow their businesses on top of flat file. It's because flawless data onboarding acts like a catalyst to get them and their customers where they need to go faster.

Lenny (00:02:40):
If you'd like to learn more or get started, check out Flat File at flatfile.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:02:47):
This episode is brought to you by Modern Treasury. Modern Treasury is a next generation operating system for moving and tracking money. They're modernizing the developer tools and financial processes for companies managing complex payment flows. Think digital wallets via crypto on ramps, ride sharing, marketplaces, instant lending, and more. They work with high growth companies like Gusto, Pipe, Class Pass and Marketa. Modern Treasuries robust APIs allow engineering to build payment flows right into your product while finance can monitor and approve everything through a sleek and modern web dashboard. Enabling real time payments, automatic reconciliation, continuous accounting and compliance solutions. Modern Treasuries platform is used to reconcile over $3 billion per month. They're one of the hottest young FinTech startups on the market today. Having raised funding from top firms like Benchmark Altimeter, SB Capital, Salesforce Ventures, and Y Combinator. Check them out at moderntreasury.com.

Lenny (00:03:50):
Yuriy, welcome to the podcast.

Yuriy Timen (00:03:52):
Thanks for having me man. This is great.

Lenny (00:03:55):
It's even better for me.

Yuriy Timen (00:03:57):
All right.

Lenny (00:03:58):
So I'm going to give a quick bio. Let me know if I missed anything really important. You were head of growth at Grammarly. You spent nine years there kind of doing all the things that helped turn that company into the killer product that it is today. You left that I think a couple years ago. Now you're advising companies mostly full-time. I think mostly on growth strategy. I think mostly consumer startups, is that about right?

Yuriy Timen (00:04:21):
A couple of super critical corrections. Number one, it was only eight and a half years.

Lenny (00:04:26):
Okay. Usually people round those up. I'm impressed that you get-

Yuriy Timen (00:04:31):
I think eight and a half is long enough. Yeah, not sure I want to round up. I know, but I'm kidding obviously. Yeah. That's largely it. Grammarly was a hell of a run and trying to take a step back from that, and stepping back has kind of taken on a life of its own vis a vis advising.

Lenny (00:04:54):
How many companies have you worked with at this point advised and what are some examples, just like companies people would know.

Yuriy Timen (00:05:01):
It's now been about, I guess two years and three months since my last day at Grammarly in an operating capacity. I've probably worked with maybe 15 companies in the last two and a little bit of years. Obviously, not all at once. It's usually four to five at any given point in time. But some of the ones that I've been really lucked out with in terms of getting aligned with companies like Canva, Airtable, Hims and Hers in the personal care space, there is otter.ai. Who else? Flow Health, the world's most downloaded period tracker.

Lenny (00:05:47):
I used that for my wife. It's handy.

Yuriy Timen (00:05:49):
Good, good. Yeah. I was trying to get my wife to try it out, but been unsuccessful.

Lenny (00:05:59):
You're failing in your growth.

Yuriy Timen (00:06:01):
She was like, "Are you trying to push me to having a third kid?" I was like, "No, no, I swear." This is just product testing.

Lenny (00:06:08):
Clever. So I've had Casey Winters on this podcast and Elena Verna. It's kind of like the three of you that it feels like have worked with the most companies as advisors. I don't know if there's some kind of contest y'all have or anything, but do you think about that at all? Is there anyone else out there that you think is in the running?

Yuriy Timen (00:06:26):
First of all, just being mentioned the same breath as those two is an accolade in and of itself. I mean, I look up to both of them. They've gone first. Also, I credit a lot of my getting started to both of them because they've been very generous with their time when I was just kind of considering advising, especially Casey, if they listen to this. Huge shine out to both of them, but Casey especially. He's such immense when it comes to just being generous with his time. So no, there is no competition, but had there been one, I suspect I'd be in lead right now because I've done it. I've done it in a shorter period of time. I'm much newer to advising than both of those, but no, I have a ton of aberration respect both of them. They're phenomenal what they do and I learned a ton from them.

Lenny (00:07:24):
I love that acceleration is fastest. Wow, sweet. So we're going to talk a lot about consumer growth strategies and your experience working with companies and a bunch of insights on things you've learned from working with companies. Before we get there just one quick question in your advising. I'm curious how many companies do you work with at once normally?

Yuriy Timen (00:07:43):
Yeah, so I play around with different quantities. So a couple of things. So you mentioned, you alluded to earlier that I advise full time. What I'll say is that mostly the only thing that I do right now professionally is advising, but it's not quite full time. I hard count my week at about three to three and a half days a week worth of work, which is a personal choice. And so that is a hard constraint that I'm working with. And within that constraint, I also feel like for me to do my best work and the work that I also enjoy the most and find the most fulfilling four to five companies is probably the max. If I try to go beyond that, the overhead that it creates in terms of the cost of context switching just becomes overwhelming. I feel like I'm not showing up as best as I can with each individual company.

Lenny (00:08:43):
As early plug or anti plug, depending on how you answer this. Are you looking for more companies to work with right now or are you just like, "Don't even try. I am so at capacity right now."?

Yuriy Timen (00:08:53):
I'm so at capacity right now. I've also just been very fortunate to always be at capacity. But I think for every four to five companies that I'm working with, think of it as a concentric circles, right? There are another, maybe 10 to a dozen companies that we're actively exploring if we want to work together in the future. And then there is another concentric circle so maybe 30 plus companies that I'm just friends with. So I'll take the plug. I'm always up for meeting Austin founders working on important problems.

Lenny (00:09:31):
Cool. Well, we're in the plug I guess. How do people find you online? What's your Twitter?

Yuriy Timen (00:09:34):
I mean, honestly, probably throw Lenny's podcast. That's one, but honestly LinkedIn is really the only place I'm pretty low key otherwise.

Lenny (00:09:45):
Okay, great. That was a lot of Meta stuff. So let's get into some meat stuff here. So you talked to a lot of consumer startups. You help them figure out how to grow, how to evolve their product, something I'm always curious about and I love your thoughts on is when you look at a consumer startup, I imagine there's a few archetypes of how they grow. I'm curious if that's a mental model you use when you're like, "Oh, I see company X. They're probably going to grow this way, and here's what they should focus on." How do you see that?

Yuriy Timen (00:10:11):
Great question. I think there are ways to answer that. My sweet spot is subscription properties and it's not just consumer. I do work with a lot of B2B companies. It's just that most of them, but what they all have in common is they lean into consumerized type of growth loops and growth motions. So they're very kind of self-serve nature or have meaningful self-serve engines. So if I think about subscription companies, I think there are probably a couple of buckets that I see them falling into. If you were able to nail your unit economics and you have really strong consumer LTVs, think Grammarly, think Canva. The single player LTVs for those companies are very, very high. They're kind of average S&B LTVs for B2B companies.

Lenny (00:11:03):
What's a number there just for folks to have a little context?

Yuriy Timen (00:11:06):
I'm not a liberty to speak to those, but we're talking in the hundreds of dollars. Most consumer subscription companies that are $5 to $7 a month. Their LTVs typically cap out at 50 to 60 bucks.

Lenny (00:11:25):
Cool.

Yuriy Timen (00:11:26):
And so if you have really healthy LTVs, and that usually means that you're attracting a proconsumer buyer, so they may be single player, but they're using it for work. And so maybe they're dispensing it or just the perceived value so much higher that they're willing to bear that $120 and $130 a year subscription. If I'm seeing things like that and I'm seeing that you're converting seven, like five plus percent of your free users to a paid subscriber, then there is a big opportunity to play paid and lean into paid growth loops and paid acquisition loops. There is another archetype, which is if there are network effects for instance, you don't find that as much with single player consumer subscription companies, but obviously social media, consumer companies.

Yuriy Timen (00:12:17):
There may be a strong referral viral loop angle if the utility increases, the utility of the product increases, the more users are using it. Another archetype I see are companies that can lead into SEO very heavily, especially if there is a long tail programmatic angle. Take Canva for instance, their biggest initial growth loop and I think this is public knowledge was their long tail SEO strategy where any kind of design project that you could think of would search for designing. It's kind of two categories of keywords, make keywords and template keywords. So if you're searching for a template of any kind, a wedding invitation, yada yada, they had incredibly strong SEO and they were just capitalizing on all the long tail traffic. Not every product is going to lend itself to that, but I always look for that early on, because you can build incredible mold with that kind of strategy.

Lenny (00:13:21):
That makes sense. There's kind of like these three engines that you can tap into. I imagine the preference would be word of mouth reality and then if that isn't going to work SEO, and if that is going to work paid, maybe just to simplify it for listeners, what are kind of signals you can go after virality and invest in that and think that could work because every founder would be like, "Yes, virality. That's how I'm going to grow." Yeah.

Yuriy Timen (00:13:47):
Yeah. Honestly, the first thing you look for is that, is there inherent product network effects? It's something that it's either there, or isn't from inception from my experience. I think it's very difficult to manufacture. You'd only study when... It's very hard to manufacture product network effects if they aren't there from the get go. So Airbnb from your days, obviously marketplace very strong product network effect dynamics. You think of collaboration tools, Airtable, monday.com, Whimsical, whom we both know very strong inherent product network effects, contrast that with a company like Grammarly. It just wasn't there. It's not an inherently multiplayer task constructed communication. And so you can try to engineer that, but from my experience, it is an uphill battle. So if you have inherent product network effects, that's when I think layering on referral loops and viral loops. You think about what Dropbox has done around file sharing. That's an iconic example.

Yuriy Timen (00:15:02):
Then it's really powerful. I think that there is another case where referral and viral loops could work even when there are inherent network effects. If you have a really beloved product, beloved brand. There's a company out of Australia that I have opportunity to invest it called Laika. They do fresh dog food subscriptions and incredibly beloved brand, a premium product. And so they're able to lean into a give one, get one referrals, even though there isn't inherent product network effects, they're still able to generate meaningful results off of the, and incentivize referring program.

Lenny (00:15:39):
When you talk about network effects, what does that mean to you? How would you define that briefly?

Yuriy Timen (00:15:45):
Yeah, to me, I mean, honestly I define it I think probably a pretty quintessential way, which is for every individual user, the utility that they derive from the product increases the more users there are on the platform. The expanded version of that is in a case of marketplaces. It may not be the bore users broadly speaking, but the more users in the markets that you care about, in the case of collaboration tools, it's not the more users in abstract terms. It's the more users within your team, the more users within your company, right? That correlates with your kind of the rise in your utility curve.

Lenny (00:16:33):
Awesome. So if you have network effects, AKA if the product becomes more useful with more people or there's amazing word of mouth already, or there's collaboration, probably a good sign that you could lean into virality or maybe referrals. What about SEO?

Yuriy Timen (00:16:50):
Oh, that's a good one. It's a very timely question because I actually in a process of helping a couple of my companies figure out if it's the right time to invest in SEO. So I've been sort of a forefront of taking exploratory meetings with agencies and SEO consultants and things like that. I mean, I would say the first thing to figure... I mean, there are a couple of pillars, because obviously we all know that SEO has a different return horizon than say paid acquisition. It's longer out. It's maybe six months is the earliest you can see results. Even then it's going to be a small trickle that compounds over time, if you're successful or you may spend three to six months leaning into an SEO strategy and then realize that it's not going to back out typically at least in historically a company probably isn't like Series B before it starts feeling like it passed a luxury of making these kind of medium to long term investments.

Yuriy Timen (00:17:58):
But I think that's shifting right now, but that's maybe a topic for later or even for another bot but a lot of the strategies that I think we're reserved for Series B are trickling down to Series A companies because they have to diversify way for pay, but maybe more on that later. So I think with SEO, it's like the first pillar I would say is, do you have a unique angle when you take a look at the SEO landscape today, you look at editorial, the landscape, which is to how to searches and who are the players there and what kind of information is being offered? Do you have something unique to contribute to that conversation? Another thing if I have to do an audit checklist, another thing is, do you have a unique programmatic angle, right? For instance, Canva did dealt with templates. Who else is programmatic?

Yuriy Timen (00:18:54):
CWELL, Redfit, obviously all the real estate, right? That's really strong-

Lenny (00:19:00):
Saint Pier.

Yuriy Timen (00:19:01):
Saint Pier, right. So do you have a programmatic angle and then understanding the competitive landscape or the other one is, do you have a unique data angle? So for instance, a company I work with called Monarch Money, which is in the personal finance management space. Think of it as a new and improved version of MIT. There is a lot of users are connecting accounts and you have a sense percenting patterns and things like that. Clearly there is a unique data, and so it's a question of, can you turn it into some kind of valuable organic search experience?

Yuriy Timen (00:19:39):
I won't go into too much detail in terms of what we're thinking of there, but that's another checkbox. If you can check two of those three boxes as a back of the envelope framework, you may be in good shape. And then it's a question of like, "How can you lower the cost of experimentation SEO as much as possible?" I think as a rule of thumb, if you can time box it to three months, what can I do at the end of three months? Is this likely to work or not?

Lenny (00:20:14):
Awesome. Couple follow up questions.

Yuriy Timen (00:20:16):
Absolutely.

Lenny (00:20:16):
One is SEO feels like this dark art where you need some SEO wizard to come help you through this.

Yuriy Timen (00:20:24):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:20:25):
Do you suggest companies find somebody or work with an agency or something else? What's your general feeling on SEO versus some other route?

Yuriy Timen (00:20:33):
I think SEO is pretty specialized skill set. There are some basic principles that always hold like best content wins and don't do shady back linking and make sure that you're on page. SEO is good and your pages are easily crawl, but I feel like everybody knows that. And where the winners are determined are between the lines. Better than a sports' analogy? Maybe you can.

Lenny (00:21:10):
Between the lines. I don't know what that comes from.

Yuriy Timen (00:21:15):
But anyway, what I mean is that there is a lot of more nuance, SEO developments and angles, where I think is where the opportunity really lies to differentiate yourself. And that requires keeping up with the latest algorithm changes. It's very hard to do that unless you are specializing in the art where the black magic of SEO, and so that's why I think getting an outside resource at least for an audit is really helpful. Now, whether it's a boutique agency or a solo consultant, I think that's more circumstantial, but I've found at least with the companies that I've worked with, if we wanted to quickly vet the SEO opportunity, I can do it in a very kind of amateur, at an amateur level.

Yuriy Timen (00:22:02):
Plug things into similar web and try to figure out the right option is there, but you can get these relatively inexpensive audits done from companies that you can then choose. Do I hire them to help with my SEO or not? But I think that audit is usually a very good use of time because they have templates. So what they can turn around for five to 10K would take you many, many human hours to try to pull together yourself.

Lenny (00:22:28):
Awesome. Are there agencies that you want to name that people can go check out or would you prefer just to keep it from having-

Yuriy Timen (00:22:35):
I'll give one plug.

Lenny (00:22:37):
Great.

Yuriy Timen (00:22:37):
I think one of the most innovative, disciplined first principles SEO thinkers and I have met is Ethan Smith from Graphite. It's not for everyone. It's a pretty high end SEO shell. So I wouldn't send the Series a company there, but Ethan also produces a lot of resources and what they've been focusing on at Graphite lately has been actually automating a lot of their work and turning it into SAS. So I don't know how far along they are, but you could probably already get into some of the betas from the tools that they're offering.

Lenny (00:23:18):
Sweet. I'm going to try to get Ethan on this podcast.

Yuriy Timen (00:23:20):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:23:21):
I've seen his stuff and it's awesome.

Yuriy Timen (00:23:23):
Yeah. He is a math scientist when it comes to SEO. Yeah.

Lenny (00:23:25):
We need those. We need math scientist on ship.

Yuriy Timen (00:23:28):
Right.

Lenny (00:23:28):
Okay. So we've talked about virality talked about SEO, paid. Imagine that's pretty straightforward if your LTV are high enough and you can pay back ads on those, then that's where you go. Imagine everyone can try it. Doesn't work for everyone. What if yeah, anything you want to add there?

Yuriy Timen (00:23:43):
I mean, there's a lot. There's a lot. I mean, I don't know how deep you want to go down the paid rabbit hole because it's changing. It's probably the most affected growth bucket in light of the market turbulence, the venture sentiment shifting. I've seen paying acquisition strategies at budgets. They are at the brunt of that fallout. And so the question is where do you want to go there?

Lenny (00:24:16):
Yeah. That's a really good topic. I was saving that for later, but let's chat it better right now.

Yuriy Timen (00:24:19):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:24:20):
I imagine part of this is Apple's tracking changes too.

Yuriy Timen (00:24:22):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:24:22):
So I guess my big question is paid still lucrative and a good path for many companies is like 50% of the time less effective. How do you see that shifting recently? And how should people think about paid in the consumer subscription startup?

Yuriy Timen (00:24:38):
Well, I think in the short term, let's break it down into phases. I think in the short term paid acquisition and just paid media dollars are contracted and we're seeing it already with Metas advertising revenue, Snaps advertising revenue. There's clearly a global contraction happening to paid media budgets. A big part of it is because all of a sudden the definition of efficient acquisition and good payback windows is shifting. So before for a consumer subscription company, 12 month payback was decent. Now it's like, you better pay back your paid media in six months or less. That's the sentiment.

Yuriy Timen (00:25:23):
So the thought is reaction is like anything that's more than six months we're well board of six months, we're cutting that and so there's that. Then there is just less tolerance for ambiguity and attribution when the sentiment is like, "Let's grow at [inaudible 00:25:38]. Grow at all costs." If you can't attribute things perfectly, that's okay. Now it's like, especially with venture back companies, you have to have two plus years of runway, managers burn a lot more diligently now. And so whatever you can't attribute to sales sue like, "That shits got to go." I don't know if we can curse on the pod or not.

Lenny (00:25:59):
Only available-

Yuriy Timen (00:26:03):
Well, I've been holding back for the last 30 minutes. No, I'm kidding.

Lenny (00:26:03):
At least.

Yuriy Timen (00:26:04):
All right.

Lenny (00:26:05):
We're not kid friendly, but nobody's cursed yet. So this could be okay. So you'll be the first.

Yuriy Timen (00:26:09):
All right. Way loud. All right. But anyways, yeah. So I think there is a short term contraction. However, that opens up an opportunity for smart kind of attribution investments. So you're seeing an emergence of some interesting attribution related attribution for incrementality related products. A couple that I personally started exploring and looking into, and then you just see a lot more heads of growth, heads of user acquisition, thinking about attribution in building their attribution stacks. And so I think that once we settle into some kind of new normal, which is going to be a combination of just better attribution stack on average for companies combined with just the level of acceptance, that attribution will never be as good as it maybe once was. We're going to probably get hit. Come out of that and you'll see paid budgets start making their way back. But even right now, during contraction, there are going to be some winners.

Yuriy Timen (00:27:26):
The companies that had strong cash positions, have strong unit economics, strong paid back periods already like Grammarly, Canva to name two that I know personally. A couple of others or many others probably, they're going to be winners because all of a sudden, if previously they were competing with companies who were nowhere as efficient as them, but for whatever reason had the green light to keep spending, now all of those are going to pull back their budgets. And so those that have been disciplined, have the instrumentation to track things better than average. They're going to benefit from decreased competition on app platforms, decreasing CPMs, et cetera. So they're going to do winners for sure.

Lenny (00:28:09):
Wow. Haven't heard this perspective. It's so interesting that the fact that it's gotten harder, it's creating new opportunities for companies to do it better and more intelligently. You said you mentioned a couple tools products that you found to be potentially helpful in this. Is there anything you could mention there?

Yuriy Timen (00:28:22):
Yeah. Yeah. I mentioned a couple that I've kind of connected with in the last couple of months. So first of all, Media Mix Modeling is making a comeback, which is something that kind of got popularized in the math meant kind of advertising era of the fifties, pre-digital, and that's how that was the piece of the methodology. I can't speak of the specifics there. The science is a little bit out of depth there, but it was basically a way to use some data to determine a budget allocation across channels at the time was probably newspapers and billboards, et etcetera.

Yuriy Timen (00:29:03):
It was leveraging data to some extent. You would were doing it maybe on a quarterly basis. And then you would only update it every quarter. There was no way with media mix modeling. There was no way to adjust budget in quarter because you weren't getting the data feedback loop that frequently. But media mix modeling is now making a comeback because there are so many offline channels that are part of folks channel portfolio today and that plus a lot of the online channels are becoming less trackable like Meta for instance, with the iOS 14 shift. And so Media Mix Modeling is going to comeback and the company that's leading the charge of bringing the Media Mix Modeling methodology of the traditional advertising era and ushering it into the digital world is a company called the Recast.

Lenny (00:29:48):
Recast.

Yuriy Timen (00:29:48):
Recast. Yeah. So I've heard really good things. I haven't tried them with any of my companies yet, but there are a couple that are on the horizon hopefully.

Lenny (00:29:58):
Double click there for a moment. Is that still useful if you're not doing TV and other forms of advertising?

Yuriy Timen (00:30:04):
I think it's still-

Lenny (00:30:04):
You're just doing-

Yuriy Timen (00:30:04):
Yeah, I think it's useful if you're spending a considerable amount, what's considerable, I'd say worth of a hundred thousand a month update media. And if you have some level of channel complexity, so you're not just like a Google Go or a Facebook, but maybe you're on three plus the channels. Then I think it still makes sense. The other ones in the incremental space, they have very different methodologists actually, because at end of the day, this might be obvious to folks, but maybe some will find value.

Yuriy Timen (00:30:34):
Click based attribution or the digital attribution were all fawning over cookie based and click based, a real parameter based attribution. It never demonstrated a causal relationship between our media spend and business results. It was only good for correlative insights. And the only way to determine causality is through real controlled experiments, randomized control experiments through incrementality testing, which is typically really hard to do cleanly and also companies have always been often wary about doing it because you have to turn off a channel potentially in a key demo and you're like, "Yeah." The benefit is to learning of whether it's actually incremental, but the cost or the sales that I will lose today. But the only way to really know how effective your paid media is through ongoing incrementality testing. So there are two companies that are addressing that. Two that I'm excited about. One is measured, can be found, measured.call, amazing domain name.

Lenny (00:31:44):
Amazing domain name, go with that.

Yuriy Timen (00:31:45):
And then the other one is incremental, but incremental-

Lenny (00:31:50):
Outcome.

Yuriy Timen (00:31:51):
... no vows except the last A between the T and the L.

Lenny (00:31:57):
Excellent, great job.

Yuriy Timen (00:31:58):
So many free plugs today.

Lenny (00:32:00):
Yeah. I love it. That's great. This is what people need. They're just like, "Okay, what do I actually do"? And so the more it's clear what to actually try and how to solve these problems. The more people can actually make change. I had a couple questions here that I wanted to follow up on. One is founders might be listening to this and they're like, "Amazing. Okay, we're going to grow. There's three ways to grow. Let's do it all. Get someone on SEO to get Jane on paid. Let's get Fred on virality."

Yuriy Timen (00:32:32):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:32:32):
So in your experience, is it smart to focus on one and then expand down the road or try them all see which one works best? How do you advise companies think about these options?

Yuriy Timen (00:32:44):
I would say focus paired with rapid iterations, right? With limited resources. Naturally you have to practice some form of essentialism and ruthless prioritization, but at the same time, the clock is always ticking. You can not burn. That there is a finite number of tries that you have at finding what works, right? What's going to help you unlock the next level of growth, get to the next funding round, extend your runway. And so I think either one taking to an extreme focus or trying multiple things is not a good thing. And just in case, it's not obvious if you focus on one thing and it ends up being the wrong thing, you've wasted really valuable time and now you have so much less time left to find something that does work. Spreading yourself very thin oftentimes in the early stage companies, it's one person who's in charge of all of growth, but they also have some other kind of responsibilities like maybe ops and customer success.

Yuriy Timen (00:33:54):
If you get them to try five different things, they may not try them anyone individually fully enough, because I like to say the only thing that's worse than a channel or a tactic that you tried not working. The only thing that's worse now is when you didn't give it the appropriate shot and you pretty much surely or erroneously concluded that it doesn't work. And it's remarkable how often you find that to be the case when I talk to companies, "Oh, YouTube, we tried it doesn't work." I'm like, "Okay, can I see what you've tried?" And then you look at it and you're like, "Oh, this thing was not designed to even have a shot at working from the get go." So to answer your question, I think it's focus with some guard rails so that you know exactly when it's time to move on to the next thing.

Lenny (00:34:51):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B Testing platform built by Airbnb alums for Modern Growth Teams. Companies like Netlify, Contentful, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool.

Lenny (00:35:21):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I love about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by user stage. Eppo does all that and more. Delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic click-through metrics and instead you turn north star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions and payments. Eppo supports test on the front end, the back end, email marketing and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com. Geteppo.com and 10X your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:36:01):
This might be too hard to answer in a chat like this, but do you have any guidance for how to know when you've gone far enough? I imagine there's a lot nuance and detail there. Is there anything that you could share?

Yuriy Timen (00:36:12):
Love the question. It's very thought provoking. I think with some tactics and some channels you can fairly objectively create some test guard rails where it's like, if it's YouTube, we know kind of minimum number of impressions that you got to get. Try two to three creative angles. Here's the click through rates range that you're looking for. If you get within these ranges on these KPIs, keep going. If you don't, abandon.

Yuriy Timen (00:36:48):
I think that's important to also know that abandonment doesn't mean we will never revisit it again, right? It just means that because every time you're evaluating, the concept of sunk cost. So you have these periodic, I think periods of reevaluation where it's like, "Okay, did we try enough? Is this more art than science frankly." It's like, "What's the incremental lift for us as a team to try to experiment with the next phase of this channel or this tactic? What is the opportunity cost of that? What are the other high profile things that we could be trying?" You were right and save this topic too hard to answer in this format, but I would break things down maybe into two types. There are some channels or tactics where you can objectively figure out som guard rails for when it's showing promise or not, because you can pull benchmarks on good click through rates and things like that. Then there are other tactics where you just have to exercise more judgment outside of benchmarks.

Lenny (00:37:54):
Yeah. Yeah. That was actually really valuable and very challenging question to try to summarize quickly so thank you. One more quick question along these lines. So you talked about these three broad ways companies grow. Oftentimes a couple of them work, something I've seen and I'm curious if you agree, usually one is like 80% of your growth and then you layer on a couple more to optimize. Is that what you see?

Yuriy Timen (00:38:18):
Yes. I think companies that we know and admire and reference in case studies or in podcast, such as this one. From the outside looking in, you oftentimes assume that it's a highly diversified growth engine. I have to say it's often not the case. Definitely the 80/20 applies. There is a kind of strategy that's working overwhelmingly well, and there is a scramble internally to minimize reliance on that one thing. And on the discover slash on the walk, the next step function, the next growth horizon. In the case of Grammarly, it was performance marketing kind of over reliance on performance marketing during part of the company's life cycle. And so it was like, "Okay, this thing is working." It's efficient so you don't want to stop pouring fire on it, but you're also thinking months and years ahead, what kind of risk does it open you up to?

Yuriy Timen (00:39:35):
And so there is a scramble to fight and at Grammarly, it's been successful there. With Canva, it was the SEO angle. So for them, that was working really well, which is more defensible than paid. That's sort of long tail programmatic SEO angle, but look, you're always susceptible to Google algorithm updates and so how do you derisk yourself from that? But to your point, yes. And I think that surprising thing to people probably is that it's also the case with some later stage companies. It's not just early stage companies that are kind of one trick pulleys. Sometimes it's later stage companies as well.

Lenny (00:40:11):
This makes me think about is there's kind of these three phases to growth. There's the kickstart phase where you're just doing a bunch of stuff, trying to get things moving. Then there's that you discover your first main growth engine and then there's layer on additional engines because you want to diversify.

Yuriy Timen (00:40:25):
Yep. And one interesting, what I believe is an interesting period and a lot of it is gut feel, right? And I try to direct companies. I encounter sometimes early stage companies is when one thing is working well and they're already worried about over reliance and they're starting to talk about diversification and I come in all the times and I see showing up in their OKRs. I come, "No, no. Too early. I'm glad that you're such a forward thinker. Put all of your energy. Sure, this one tactic is accounting for say 80 plus percent of your new user acquisition, but your user acquisition is still small. So don't get distracted with diversification. We'll get there. Lean more into this, hit this growth rates, stand this up. Build this into a real strategic advantages thing that's working."

Yuriy Timen (00:41:17):
So I actually have to talk them out, focusing on diversification too early. Contrast that with some later stage companies for who are... At scale, I know 50 plus million ARR, 90 plus percent reliant on a single acquisition channel, which just mire with risk and diversification is a blind spot for them. And then with those, I have to be like, "Hey y'all. Here's the risk that you're carrying. Let's start carving out bandwidth resources to try to go and explore these other channels with tactics."

Lenny (00:41:49):
That's such an important point. It reminds me Casey has this hilarious line that he uses that the money's always in the banana stand or there's always more money in the banana stand from [inaudible 00:41:59] development. That basically your growth is probably going to come from the same place it's already come from.

Yuriy Timen (00:42:03):
Yep.

Lenny (00:42:04):
And that you shouldn't take that for granted. And you should put most of your efforts into continuing to optimize that versus being distracted by, "Oh, let's do SEO now."

Yuriy Timen (00:42:11):
I see that argument for sure.

Lenny (00:42:13):
So you mentioned at this point about how later stage growth strategies are starting to move earlier into growth strategy planning. I'd love to hear more on that.

Yuriy Timen (00:42:22):
Yeah. Let me expand on that in the world that we lived in last 18 months, or let's say up until say three to five months ago. We were living in a world where funding was abundant and plentiful, startups were conditions to think that they could raise twice a year. Valuations were quite toppling within a year. You raise in January and then you raise in November and your valuation five X. And so companies were coming off of these ridiculous Series As of 15 to 25 million dollar As and they were like, "We got to grow as quickly as possible. What can we activate to give us immediate return?" And the answer is almost always paid. That one going to give you, especially if you're think you want to go back to raising less than 12 months later, that forces you to focus on very kind of short term tactics, short payoff tactics.

Yuriy Timen (00:43:28):
And so things that SEO, there was no room to think about that for early stage companies. Because payoff is going to come maybe in 12 months in terms of meaningful payoff. We care about getting to the next round and maximizing our valuation between now and then. SEO is for the grown up companies. When we're that we could think about it. And they were getting the reinforcement from everywhere, from peers, from VCs. It's like it's growth, growth, growth. The growth at any cause.

Yuriy Timen (00:44:02):
I think what happened now and we'll see where things stabilized because I think we're still in the midst of a little bit of chaos. What's happening now is the same VCs are saying, "Okay, it's now survival." You have to extend your runway, minimize burn, high burning if you have to. And all of a sudden growth, whether explicitly or via inference becomes kind of a secondary objective, especially for all these companies that are far from being cash flow positive. They have to figure out how to stay alive, but not have to go back to the market and be sort of a victim of shitty terms. And so I feel this is me extrapolating because venture capitalist didn't actually tell me this, but I'm extrapolating that growth is a secondary objective now. It's really focusing on sustainability due to economics, accepting your runway control your destiny, getting to default life.

Yuriy Timen (00:45:00):
And all of a sudden it's like, "Okay. Plus paid is a lot less attractive now. Can't afford to be acquiring users at like LTV cap one to one." That's now a no-no. And so SEO is now becoming more attractive because once you got your burn under control and you're thinking, "Okay, we saved all this money by reducing our paid budget. We're cutting it entirely. How do we put some of those resources back to work?" And all of a sudden SEO starts looking a lot more lucrative because it's almost like you took the urgency of grow at any cost in the next six months, you took that out of the equation. So now it's like we're in a position where we don't have to go back to raising 12, 18, 24 months. We have 18, 24 months worth of runway and now companies are starting to think more in terms of building more sort of sustainable and defensible growth initiatives.

Lenny (00:46:02):
Fascinating. And as much as people may want to do SEO, like we talked about earlier, doesn't mean they will be able to pull it off because there's these things that have to be approved for your type of company and-

Yuriy Timen (00:46:12):
Yes.

Lenny (00:46:12):
Yeah. Going back to point you made earlier about paid being a really interesting opportunity right now because it's become harder. Would you say generally you're kind of like pro, tri paid, go paid be in this time because I'm finding a lot of startups are like, "Oh, we can't do paid anymore. We're trying all these other approaches to grow." Is that like alpha right now? Start thinking about paid in a creative way and maybe this is going to be a huge advantage.

Yuriy Timen (00:46:35):
So there are two pieces to do paid. I mean I'm oversimplifying, but I think people will hopefully appreciate the over the oversimplification. Number one, because it actually drives returns at efficient unit economic, whatever that may mean for your company, your business, your industry. The other way to do it is because it's a very quick way to get learnings on messaging and positioning on designs on features. You're thinking of launching et cetera, right? It's hard to get faster learnings at scale than A/B testing headlines, Google search or whatever. I think the problem that I find is when a company can't have which camper in or where they try to say that they're in both, but really it's like, "Okay, you're funneling a hundred K a month." It's super inefficient and they're not even running experiments to actually get the learnings. I can assess the company, even if I don't download the industry as well, based on just seeing their funnel performance, their conversion rates, their retention curves, their LTDs, understanding their churn.

Yuriy Timen (00:47:43):
I could say whether they stand the chance at making paid work as a former strategy. So not just the learning mechanism, not just the kind of a feedback engine, but actually a profitable at delivering acquisition channel or strategy. And if I see that they're not there because the funnel doesn't convert well, the users don't retain the LTDs are too low. Then I say, "Hey, it's not time for paid. Maybe car on a little bit of budget if you want to quickly test positioning and things like that. But it's just too soon." But instead I encounter a company that's really healthy conversion rates, strong LTDs. I do a little bit of competitor research and I can see where the opportunities are, which channels are less saturated than others. Then I may say, "Hey, it's worth it. It's worth a go." And also just seeing the bigger picture of their financial health, how much runway do you have? What does your monthly burn look like?

Lenny (00:48:41):
Right? Because paids like cash going out the door and it will return hopefully at some point might be six months might be a year, and so that's a real constraint. You mentioned onboarding and funnel conversion. Two questions there. One, do you have a heuristic of here's good for conversion rates? Is there something that you think about there that you could share or is it very case dependent?

Yuriy Timen (00:49:03):
I think it's case dependent, but yeah, it is. It's not case dependent. It's category dependent. So it's not that every company is so case, but it's like, we got to know about what buckets we're talking about. I will say that... Let's say we talk about prosumer premium SAS, ala Grammarly, ala Canva, Whimsical, InVideo, things like that. Yeah. I can confidently say a healthy website visit to a free user, a free account creation conversion rate. It's probably in that 20 to 35% range.

Lenny (00:49:43):
From landing on the site to signing up?

Yuriy Timen (00:49:45):
From landing on site to a free user at scale. Earlier stage, you have strong product market fit with some kind of small audience segment that conversion can be 40 to 50%, but as you go broader, it'll probably asymptote at like 25, 30%. What about a conversion if you're premium from a free user to a premium account or paying account? I think anything under 5% is not going to work long term, regardless of how big your top of funnel is. You may get the soft point, but for you to remain an independent company continuously growing pre IPO, I don't think it's going to happen. It's got to be north of 5%, ideally like more than 7%.

Lenny (00:50:39):
Wow. Super handy. On the onboarding point, what's your thoughts on investing in onboarding and that part foe of how often is that a fruitful area of investment?

Yuriy Timen (00:50:49):
Almost always. A lot of my work is in that sort of a prosumer space. So the products tend to be more complex. Airtable, whimsical, Canva, InVideo. They're very robust products. And so it's very easy to get lost in their editors. I think what all of those companies are trying to do for their respective verticals and use cases is they're trying to democratize access to fades that previously you have to rely on professionals for. Maybe in the case of bayer team bot, it's your engineers. In the case of PM bot, it is professional graphic designers. In the case of a video, it's professional video editors. So when they're trying to democratize access, but they're also trying to make the products robust enough to be comparable to a professional great quality. And it's a very difficult place to play it, right? It's like, how do you make it simple enough where a nonprofessional can use it, but robust enough where they go and say, "Oh yeah, this is as good as if I would've hired a professional fill in the blank."

Yuriy Timen (00:52:19):
And that's where onboarding, sorry for the long answer. That's where onboarding is really, really important because there's such a huge difference between landing someone on that initial editor page, be it Airtable, Canva having that left to their own devices versus getting as much information or as much relevant information front and then customizing that landing experience for them. So that if they're there to do X and we know XYZ about them, we're able to guide them and not expose them to the robustness of the product all at once. So the short answer is almost all the time onboarding is a big opportunity.

Lenny (00:53:04):
Awesome. That's what I was expecting to hear, to give folks some context. What's kind of an order magnitude that you've seen improvement on onboarding and maybe impact on a company improving onboarding.

Yuriy Timen (00:53:15):
Earlier stage companies where still haven't really approached the local maximal, but you haven't experimented with a ton of things. I mean, you can two to four X activation rates easily through onboarding. I think later stage companies like maybe Series B beyond, I think you can still probably get to 20 to 30% lift at activations. It depends on how many low hanging fruit are left to tackle.

Lenny (00:53:46):
That makes sense. Yeah. Till the onboarding, there's always money in the onboarding banana stand. On that kind of same idea, do you have a general feeling of investments in this stuff often pays off and helps you grow and is often higher ROI and investments in bucket B are rarely successful. What would those two buckets be?

Yuriy Timen (00:54:07):
So thinking of investments rawly, right? Not just monetarily.

Lenny (00:54:13):
Yeah. Yeah. Time and resources.

Yuriy Timen (00:54:15):
Yeah. I mean, I would say that getting to know your customer always pays off. So it's user interviews and getting to know your market, your customers, and your prospects always pays off. Customer research, inside surveying, interviewing panels incredibly useful. And I found that to be very especially early stages. The amount of clarity at momentum that it can create inside of a seed Series A up to Series B company when you first do some proper research push. The way it can galvanize the team and give them focus and clarity and purpose is remarkable. So that always pays off. What doesn't pay off? I mean, I think over reliance on paid, it comes to bite you in the rear end. When I think about tracking an attribution, I think it's a question of the right level of investment at the right stage.

Yuriy Timen (00:55:19):
Rarely do companies get it right. They usually fall into one of two buckets where they underinvest in attribution and they are now, their budgets are up high. They have a broad channel portfolio and they have a hard time figuring out what's working, what isn't and they just get into this inertia. It's like, "Well, overall, the company's been growing and it's been growing roughly over the same time that we've been increasing our spend. We're scared to break it. So we're just going to keep spending." Or companies that read horror stories about other companies overspending. They sometimes try to invest in attribution too much, believe it or not where they're trying to get everything perfect and scientifically pure. But what they don't realize is that the payoff may not always be there. And so how do I fit this into your question of, I think tracking attribution incrementality is definitely a worthwhile investment arena, but it could both be a good or bad depending on the level. So you got to make sure the level investment is appropriate for your stage when you stand to aim for-

Lenny (00:56:35):
Awesome. You're such a good interviewee that you come back to the question.

Yuriy Timen (00:56:39):
No, that I promise.

Lenny (00:56:40):
That was great. Okay. One last question. Before we get to our very exciting lightning round. I'd love you to get your thoughts on advertising on TikTok and YouTube and broadly is there any other tactics, avenues that you think are kind of underutilized or emerging that folks should be thinking about?

Yuriy Timen (00:56:58):
Yeah. So TikTok, one thing I'll say about TikTok is I'm seeing it come up more and more as a channel that works well. And sometimes even the most efficient channel, most efficient digital channel for some brands. But I think that the thing about TikTok that oftentimes I was surprised about is you often hear, "Oh, TikTok that's for the 15 to 22 year olds." I'm bad with my gens Z and oh, my audience is different. So I'm just going to ignore the champ. TikTok has so many users and it's still so relatively unsaturated with advertisers that your audience is on there. You'd be surprised.

Yuriy Timen (00:57:46):
I've worked with brands that their core demo is like 40 plus married making 200K plus in household annual income. And you wouldn't think that demo is on TikTok and it is. So what point about TikTok? Other channels, I think out at home is still not getting enough love. Podcasts? Okay. Yep, yep.

Lenny (00:58:14):
Spots through this one. I recall you heard it from Yuriy.

Yuriy Timen (00:58:17):
Direct mail, what has happened? They've gotten better with attribution because before a lot of those channels were written off as sort of attribution is just too hard on there and attribution is so good and reliable on digital. So that's that gap that canyon that existed in attribution capabilities of online and offline, deterred a lot of people from offline. Today offline has gotten better and actually positioning themselves as being able to do attribution, but also online attribution is deteriorated. So all of a sudden that argument kind of slimmed out a little bit and I'm seeing offline get a lot more traction and in podcasts, especially are actually very, very performant for a lot of brands. Those are a couple of things that come to mind.

Lenny (00:59:11):
Those are great. Happy to hear the podcast piece. Excellent. And then I actually, I'm an investor in a startup that Databig at a home campaign and they just told me that it was a 10 to one positive ROI on the deals that they got out of it. So I've been seeing that too, and that's such a good point that the measurement and attribution online has come down where it maybe makes more sense to try stuff like that. Amazing. All right. Are you ready for our very exciting lightning round? I'm going to ask you five questions I think, and then just, yeah, let's go through it quick.

Yuriy Timen (00:59:44):
Let's do it.

Lenny (00:59:45):
Let's do it. Okay. What are two or three books that you recommend most to other people?

Yuriy Timen (00:59:50):
Ooh, that's something that I think is very wrong to recency bias, right? It's like, what are some of the books you've read recently that you've enjoyed? But I would say there are a couple of books that stuck with me over the years. I think on the business side, where on the business side productivity side, it's a book called Essentialism. I forget the author's name. I think his last name is McKeown or something. And it's basically the book about cutting out the noise and finding a singular focus and doing that really well. It's a book that was a game changer for me at Grammarly being sort of new in my career, having really aggressive goals, not being scared to say no. Taking on a lot, just feel it thinking like, "Well, I'm only working 12 hours a day. There's 12 more left. I can do it."

Yuriy Timen (01:00:45):
And then when you end up stepping into a leadership role, which happened for me, I mean, that happened prior to grounded, but really I was able to grow into that role at Grammarly. That book was incredible and I used it a lot. I pretty much got copies for everybody on the team, like 40 plus people. So that is a book I swear by.

Yuriy Timen (01:01:06):
I read a lot outside of work and business. So I don't know if it's appropriate, but I'll say that. It's Frankl's, A Man's Search for Meaning is just a remarkable memoir on perseverance and I think that biggest takeaway is you can't control what's happening around you, but you can control your reaction to it. And then I'd say the book that I read recently, because I was very affected by the Russia invasion of Ukraine. I'm originally from Ukraine. I believe you are as well. So it hit very close to home and there have been a lot of references drawn between the President's Zelensky and his response in the war and Winston Churchill's response in 1941 when Hitler started marching through Europe. And so I read a book called I think The Splendid and the Vile by Eric Larson.

Lenny (01:02:02):
Yeah. I read that. I read that.

Yuriy Timen (01:02:03):
Did you also read it since the invasion?

Lenny (01:02:06):
No, it was before that, but I totally get that now.

Yuriy Timen (01:02:09):
Reading it right now because I've been following the conflict very closely, but for people who haven't followed the conflict or maybe have only followed the rush, the war kind of in a cursory way, you can put what's happening into historical context remarkably well. So I feel like that book accomplishes two things. Number one, it's like you learned something about not so distant history that maybe you didn't know, which was about Great Britain and Winston Churchill kind of courageous response in the face of Hitler's invasion of Europe. But you also can draw so many parallels to what's happening today. And hopefully that helps us understand what's at stake, not to end on two grandiose of a note.

Lenny (01:02:57):
We'll go less grandiose quickly, but I will add one thing that stood out in that book that is also true in the Ukraine is how during the fire bombing of Britain, people are just going out every day, going to clubs, still having-

Yuriy Timen (01:03:09):
I know. Steal them their life.

Lenny (01:03:11):
And same thing even today in Ukraine is.

Yuriy Timen (01:03:14):
And not just keep, but it's very life.

Lenny (01:03:17):
I love that. Okay. We'll move on to less, less serious stuff maybe. What a transition to, what's your favorite other podcast?

Yuriy Timen (01:03:27):
Honestly, there's only one other podcast that I'll listen to right now because I've just been so consumed. I listened to a lot of live streams and read a lot about the conflict, which has taken up so much of my head space. That's not work related, but I would say that the All in Pod. I feel like it's a cool way for me to just catch up on everything that's going on through their unique filter.

Lenny (01:03:50):
Yeah.

Yuriy Timen (01:03:50):
That's probably the-

Lenny (01:03:52):
Cool. Yeah. I learned a lot.

Yuriy Timen (01:03:53):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:03:53):
I learned a lot from that one. That's so much drama on that show. Okay. Great. Favorite recent movie or TV show. Anything stand out.

Yuriy Timen (01:04:00):
So that's another thing. Since February I've watched nothing. My Netflix skew just keeps growing because they keep emailing me saying this new season is out. I'm like, "Oh yeah. I used to that show. Let me add it to the queue." I mean, recently I had some downtime. The kids were with grandma, so I watch movie Hustle with Adam Sandler.

Lenny (01:04:22):
Love that. So good.

Yuriy Timen (01:04:23):
Yeah. It was good. It was it's very light. It's not like a movie that's going to make you think a lot, but it was just good old entertainment. Yeah.

Lenny (01:04:31):
I like that. I like that summary. Yeah, it was so delightful. Maybe one more question. Who else in the industry do you most respect as a thought leader? Maybe someone people may not know or if anyone else comes to mind.

Yuriy Timen (01:04:43):
That's a very good question. So I would say first off, I do believe that some of the brightest minds, honestly, in any craft are people that you never hear because it takes a certain personality, energy, and probably a lot of other circumstances to invest in your personal brand. And also it's very hard to do that while still staying relevant as a practitioner. I mean, when I think about myself two years ago before starting advising, I was just kind of living in my Grammarly cave. And I felt like I was probably at the top of my craft, but I didn't have time to pick my head up or not, maybe not even just tie, but I didn't know where to start to pick my head up and do something like this. I would say some people that, I mean, I mentioned Ethan in terms of SEO. SEO and just organic growth loops and content as a growth engine, he is best in class.

Yuriy Timen (01:05:49):
Who else? So Mark Fisk, he shows up in the Reforge chats a lot. He was leading growth and marketing at Credit Karma for a while. And right now he's an investor I think at the HRG Capital, but he is a really, really strong thought leader on all things, performance marketing attribution, and just kind of paid acquisition at large. Those are two people that I make sure I... And there are others of course, but those are two who I make sure I stay in touch with at least on a quarterly basis because any casual catch up just yield so many unique nuggets.

Lenny (01:06:25):
Amazing. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more and how can listeners be useful to you?

Yuriy Timen (01:06:31):
Honestly, I don't have a very strong online presence. I would say LinkedIn is probably the only place where I seek things the recent, so folks can find me there. They can also find me inside of Lenny's Newsletter. I do. I do. I do, but you can appearance there once in a while and on that's odd.

Lenny (01:06:53):
True.

Yuriy Timen (01:06:54):
How folks can be helpful to me, honestly, promote and shout out of Lenny's Newsletter and Lenny's Pod and that if you're building awesome things, come talk to me. I always carve out some amount of time in my life just for noncommercial things, just to have conversations with founders and spent 30 minutes with them on a phone, expecting nothing in return and maybe save them some time from making some of the mistakes that I've made and help direct them on a more path. So it's about it.

Lenny (01:07:27):
Amazing. You are awesome. Thank you so much for making the time to do this. I learned a ton. I can't wait to get this episode out. There's just so much meat to this thing,

Yuriy Timen (01:07:36):
Dude this was good.

Yuriy Timen (01:07:37):
I feel like my nervousness was unfounded. This was super organic. You are just as welcoming as you are outside of the pod. So yeah. Thanks for having me.

Lenny (01:07:50):
Thanks Yuriy. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

