Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
I'm curious what it is that PMs do that annoy engineers most.

Camille Fournier (00:00:04):
Hoarding credit. PMs, they tend to be the front-facing person for initiative. Engineers sometimes think that they don't get the credit for their work because the PM takes all the glory and all the credit for the project that they really worked very hard on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:19):
I find the best PMs are the ones that talk the least and encourage other people to do the presenting-

Camille Fournier (00:00:23):
The next thing that engineers really get annoyed about with PMs, when they just don't understand the details and act like they don't matter, it just shows a real lack of empathy for the work that engineers are doing and I think it really can be very off-putting.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:34):
Is there any insight you can give about what people may be missed about the motivation of engineers, what gets them excited?

Camille Fournier (00:00:40):
A lot of people assume that engineers just write code and don't underestimate the ability for your engineers to want to understand the business problem, want to understand the customer problem. I think the product managers that have done the best, they're not threatened by other people having ideas.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:00):
Today, my guest is Camille Fournier. Camille is one of the most respected technology executives in tech and the author of the Manager's Path, which many considered the definitive guide for navigating your career and moving into management. Over the course of her career, she was CTO of Rent The Runway, VP of technology at Goldman Sachs, global head of engineering and architecture at JP Morgan Chase and head of platform engineering at Two Sigma. She's also releasing a new book later this year called Platform Engineering, A Guide for Technical Product and People Leaders, which you can actually pre-order today and we get into this topic in the latter half of the conversation.

(00:01:36):
We also dig into what PMs do that most annoys engineers and how to stop doing these things. Why major rewrites are often a trap. Why you may want to be doing fewer one-on-ones. What most surprises people when they become a manager and some really useful heuristics for how long you should stay in IC before you make the leap into management and tons more. This episode covers a lot of ground and we'll help you think about management. platform teams, team culture and the PM and end relationship in a whole new way. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube.

(00:02:09):
It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you Camille Fournier. Camille, thank you so much for being here, welcome to the podcast.

Camille Fournier (00:02:23):
Thank you so much for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:25):
It's my pleasure. I want to start by asking you a question that is on the minds of a lot of product managers is how to be less annoying as a product manager. I know you worked with a lot of engineers over time. I'm curious what it is that PMs do that annoy engineers most and how can PMs stop doing that?

Camille Fournier (00:02:42):
I would say there are a few things that PMs do that annoy engineers and to be clear, I am sure that engineers annoy PMs, just as much. So I've realized this is a two-way street. So I think there's some things that are really easy to fix and some things that are maybe a little bit harder. So the easy things to fix are hoarding credit. Sometimes I think PMs because they tend to be the front-facing person for initiatives, they're talking to customers, they're talking to the executive team, whatever. Engineers sometimes think that they don't get the credit for their work because the PM takes all the glory and all the credit for the project that they really worked very hard on, right?

(00:03:26):
So making every effort to be credit sharing and inclusive of the engineering team and giving them the opportunity to speak about their contributions when it makes sense. I think those are all things that PMs can do to avoid that kind of ... What I consider a pretty easy annoyance, just like don't pour it all the credit. This is not just you, right? There's a lot of work has to go into that. I think that sort of dovetails into the next thing that engineers really get annoyed about with PMs when they just don't understand the details and act like they don't matter and I think this is just a little bit of a cultural difference.

(00:04:05):
I mean, even managers, just normal managers, people like me who are looking across really broad areas or you have to be kind of big picture focused, and you forget that engineering done successfully really is all about the details and you don't necessarily have to understand all of those details, but when you act like they don't matter and you don't care about them and it's just like, I don't care, just like tell me when you can get this done or why is it going to take so long? My god, this just seems like such a little thing. It just shows a real lack of empathy for the work that engineers are doing and I think it really can be very off-putting.

(00:04:42):
Even though I will totally agree that sometimes you're going to get details that don't really matter and you just have to be a little bit patient in those circumstances.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:04:50):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX. If you're an engineering leader or on a platform team, at some point your CEO will inevitably ask you for productivity metrics, but measuring engineering organizations is hard and we can all agree that simple metrics like the number of PRs or commits doesn't tell the full story. That's where DX comes in. DX is an engineering intelligence solution designed by leading researchers, including those behind the DORA and SPACE frameworks. It combines quantitative data from developer tools with qualitative feedback from developers to give you a complete view of engineering productivity and the factors affecting it.

(00:05:28):
Learn why some of the world's most iconic companies like Etsy, Dropbox, Twilio, Vercel and Webflow rely on DX. Visit DX's website at getdx.com/lenny. Let me tell you about CommandBar. If you're like me and most users I've built product for, you probably find those little in-product pop-ups really annoying. Want to take a tour? Check out this new feature, and these pop-ups are becoming less and less effective since most users don't read what they say. They just want to close them as soon as possible, but every product builder knows that users need help to learn the ins and outs of your product. We use so many products every day and we can't possibly know the ins and outs of everyone.

(00:06:09):
CommandBar is an AI-powered toolkit for product, growth, marketing and customer teams to help users get the most out of your product, without annoying them. They use AI to get closer to user intent, so they have search and chat products that let users describe what they're trying to do in their own words and then see personalized results like customer walkthroughs or actions, and they do pop-ups too, but their nudges are based on in-product behaviors like confusion or intent classification, which makes them much less annoying and much more impactful. This works for web apps, mobile apps and websites.

(00:06:42):
And they work with industry-leading companies like Gusto, Freshworks, HashiCorp and LaunchDarkly. Over 15 million end-users have interacted with CommandBar. To try out CommandBar, you can sign up at commandbar.com/lenny and you can unlock an extra 1000 AI responses per month for any plan. That's commandbar.com/lenny. By the way, CommandBar just changed their name to Command AI.

Camille Fournier (00:07:08):
The third is playing telephone. Anybody in a manager role can fall victim to this, but I think PMs especially can be very annoying. So if you are being asked questions that you cannot answer because you just don't know or because that's something that involves a level of technical detail that only the engineers have that you just don't have, and you put yourself in this in-between position where people ask you questions, you turn around, you ask the engineers questions, you take whatever they say, especially when you don't really understand it, which happens sometimes, right? Go back to the original asker and sort of get in this middle-person scenario.

(00:07:51):
I think that is very annoying and frankly, it's a waste of time for everyone. This is something that managers of all stripes do, but PMs definitely do it and that drives engineers, particularly senior engineers on projects, it's crazy. And then, the last one that I wanted to put on this list is just when sometimes it feels like product managers want to hoard all the ideas for themselves, right? They want to be the ones that come up with every single sort of product idea and every single detail. What I see happen in those cases is that I see engineers start to over-engineer things, because engineers are like, well, I need to take control of something.

(00:08:30):
I want to have some creative outlet, so I'm going to use my engineering skills as my creative outlet and I'm going to spend a lot of time obsessing over the right framework or the right this, that or the other. That may actually not matter that much with products delivery, but when you take the people that are part of the project team out of the creative loop entirely, they're going to find that creative outlet somewhere else and it's actually kind of bad for the product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:56):
That's really interesting, the last one. So you're saying if you keep engineers from having a voice in what you're building and prioritizing, that's what encourages engineers to rethink, let's just rebuild this thing, let's use a new framework, let's rewrite this system.

Camille Fournier (00:09:09):
Yeah, I mean that's my ... that happens without you doing that, sometimes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:10):
Yeah.

Camille Fournier (00:09:18):
I do think ... I think when I see it worst and I can basically always predict what I'm going to see, a lot of that kind of engineers building stuff, finding creative outlets and kind of building stuff, maybe they shouldn't be. I'm going to find that in places where they are so quashed their creativity for the actual business or product that they're building and their voice in that is so ignored that they don't have any outlets in that space and so, they are going to use the space that they have an outlet in, the place where they have some control and that's usually the technology choices and the details there.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:54):
That's fascinating. I want to actually dig further into that around rewrites. You have a really interesting take on that, but before we get there, let me spend a little time on some of these. These are awesome. So on this theme of not involving engineers in ideation and coming up with what you're actually building, what have you seen just very tactically, is there anything you've seen that PM do super well?

Camille Fournier (00:10:17):
I think the product managers that have done the best, they're not threatened by other people having ideas. They're not threatened by the engineering team being full of smart people because they realize that yeah, some of the engineers may have good ideas, but they still don't really know how to do the product job. Just my experience is there are plenty of engineers who actually think they can be product managers and they don't really understand all of the elements of the product job that they would need to be successful. And when product managers take the time to build those relationships, well, make sure that people do feel like they can both share their ideas, but also that they start to appreciate what the job of this product person actually is.

(00:11:02):
And what they're really bringing to the table in terms of really how do we measure this input? How do we really understand the customers, how do we really think through the details of what's going to make this successful from a business or a customer perspective? I do think that that creates just a much better interaction pattern and then, engineers can feel good about sharing ideas and understanding that many of them won't go anywhere, but there's somebody that's actually going to listen and take the time to care about them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:37):
Coming back to some of the things that you said annoy engineers of PMs, this idea of playing the middle person, sounds like the solution clearly is there. Just connect the engineer to the other engineer or your engineer to the PM that's trying to figure this out, right?

Camille Fournier (00:11:49):
That one is not always easy because again, you have this tension of a lot of the job, of any management role is being in meetings and filtering stuff so that people who are in focus ... individual contributor mode can focus and get things done and not spend half of their weekend in meetings. You've just got to be very careful about knowing when you're crossing that line and when you're crossing it too often. And if you're having to often say, "Let me get back to you, let me get back to you, I don't know, let me get back to you." Maybe the person you're talking to is asking the wrong level of questions of you.

(00:12:26):
Maybe you need to connect them to the engineers directly, but just being aware that that shouldn't be a default behavior. That will happen occasionally, but it shouldn't be a thing that happens a lot because if it's happening a lot, then you're likely missing something, you're likely losing something in that telephone game translation and that's going to cause problems over time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:47):
Awesome. So basically, if you're just finding your middle person too much, then it may be time to connect people directly. And I know the reason PMs often are afraid of this is the engineer may agree to something that they think is a bad idea for their team or may not understand all the ramifications on the product or just obviously, just spend their time in meetings and not be building anything.

Camille Fournier (00:13:12):
Yeah, yeah, and sometimes you mean you do it in a group meeting. I feel like Slack and other chat type things actually make it a lot easier to see, have the right people in a group in a thing, but again, that's distracting. So there's not an easy solution to that one, just I think it's important to be aware of it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:27):
Yeah, that's a really good point. And then, in terms of hoarding credit, is there any tactical thing you've seen PMs do really well here is it, just every time they're announcing the product, "Hey, these engineers were involved or-"

Camille Fournier (00:13:37):
It's more than just saying thank you to all these people, but it's actually sometimes stepping back and letting other people speak, especially if it's something that's a really, really big technical lift. I don't think there's a super easy fix to that. I think it is just really being mindful that that can be very much a sore point for engineers when they just feel like, "This is my work, I'm not getting any credit for it, and this person is hogging all the glory."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:07):
I love that. Yeah, I find the best PMs are the ones that talk the least and encourage other people to do the presenting and announcing. And so, I think that's a really good reminder is let your engineers do that. Okay, amazing. So we talked a little bit about this idea of rewriting and how engineers sometimes just want to rewrite the system and I think a lot of PMs do too. A lot of times you're building your features on a thing that someone that doesn't even work at the company and were built five, 10 years ago, and there's always this sense of, "Okay, maybe we should just rewrite this thing everything will move so much faster."

(00:14:39):
Do you have a really interesting take that I think a lot of PMs will love to hear, which is that rewrites are often a big trap and often don't end up being what you think they might be? Can you just talk about your experience and perspective on this?

Camille Fournier (00:14:50):
Yeah, so I mean I have personally overseen a number of, if not quite rewrites, re-architectures and major system evolutions. So I absolutely do think they are sometimes a thing that needs to happen, but I also, have seen so many instances of cases where the engineers have convinced themselves that the only solution to the woes that they're experiencing with the system, it's hard to support, it's hard to change. Nobody wants to work on it, because it's this old crappy technology, is that they just have to go over to the side, build the new thing that will replace this old system and that is going to sort of free them from their misery.

(00:15:41):
And I think projects where you acknowledge that you do need to do an uplift, but you make a very thoughtful staged plan as to how you're going to do that, and you really think through, okay, we don't need to touch all of this stuff, but we're going to take the recommendation system, it really needs to be uplifted and that's a well-contained, you know, API and so we can start to fix that without having to change the whole whatever web framework, right? So I do think there are ways to do these evolutions, but people really underestimate. They underestimate the time to migrate stuff from the old system to the new system, is a huge, huge problem.

(00:16:24):
Particularly when you're talking about systems where you have sort of external people using the system in some way, whether it's web UIs or APIs. You think, "Oh, we kind of know what's going on, so it's not going to be that big a deal." Engineers notoriously, notoriously, notoriously, massively underestimate the migration time for old system to new system and that causes a lot of problems. By the way, you still have to support the old system while you're working on the new system. So I doubt many of the PMs in the audience are ever happy when they hear, we need to go away for six months, a year, two years to build this new thing and we just can't really add any features to the system in the interim.

(00:17:08):
That's infuriating, I'm sure, and frankly that's a problem and I don't know that that should be an acceptable answer in many cases. There may occasionally again be a case where that is what has to happen, but I think most of the time you can't really afford to just say we're going to go away and we're not going to touch the system for a long time and we're going to build something new over here. So many things about why that doesn't make any sense. So this is a little bit of field of the blog post that you're referring to. So, if you've got a system that doesn't really need feature enhancement or development because it's just sort of fine and the users are using it.

(00:17:47):
And it's just annoying to the engineers, why in the world would you invest so much money in writing a new version of it? There's a little bit of a cognitive dissonance that sometimes happens if you need to do new stuff and the old system literally is not ... it's not possible to do the new stuff that you need to do, you need to figure out a path to get to a sustainable system or you can continue to add and evolve. You should be investing and so there does need to be an investment, but you have to ask yourself, if I could go away and not touch this and not do anything to it for a long period of time without it really harming my business, is it worthwhile to change it at all?

(00:18:28):
Does it matter, and there's some questions there. I also think that when people try to do rewrites, particularly again if it's something that you're really trying to just move to a new language for example or sort of modernize in a certain way, [inaudible 00:18:45] a lot of times people really underestimate what the old system does and how well they know what the old system does. There's so much logic buried in legacy systems, it tends to be undocumented, it tends to be weird. You haven't thought through all the business rules, you haven't thought through the data formatting and I think again, it's much, much harder to replicate all the important things from the old system to the new system than people expect.

(00:19:14):
So there's more than that, but I do think sometimes you need to evolve systems and my advice would be when you're struggling making an evolution plan, take pieces potentially of the old system, uplift them, make them more scalable, make them easier to work with, clean up the tech debt, but trying to say we're going to just go away. We're going to rewrite, we're going to build something brand new and it's going to solve all our problems, it just very rarely works.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:42):
I think a lot of PMs will be like, "Yes, thank you so much for saying this, because I think that's also always a big struggle between the ENG team and the PM team." So just to summarize what I think a lot of people miss or what you're saying a lot of people miss when they're thinking about let's rewrite this thing, is the migration to the new system, migrating customers, users, data to the new thing is going to take a lot longer than you expect. You underestimate knowing what it actually does and you're going to miss features and you can introduce new bugs. This actually is very similar to what I've seen with redesigning a whole product flow.

(00:20:15):
There's always this sense of let's just rethink this onboarding flow from scratch or let's rebuild this part of the product and always it ends up being a negative experiment result. It always ends up being less good and then, you have to spend all this time clawing back to get to where you were and also, you forget the stuff that would ... the features that you had and you're like, "Oh, shit, I forgot about that feature, I forgot about that feature." So it's interesting, there's a very similar situation in the product side. Okay, amazing. I'm going to go to a slightly different topic, which is around engineering leadership.

(00:20:45):
So I know you've written a lot about engineering leadership, you spent a lot of times with engineering leaders, so I have a few questions here. One is that I know that one of the things that haunts engineering leaders most is finding the balance between staying technical and their technical expertise, and their leadership expertise and basically finding the right altitude of how high ... where to be in the org and also how in the details to be, and also staying technical enough to be relevant. What have you learned in your own experience of finding that balance and how do you advise engineering leaders as they struggle with this?

Camille Fournier (00:21:18):
Yeah, so one piece of advice I give everybody is don't stop being a hands-on technical until you feel like it's in your bones. You feel like you've got mastery that you could ... if you know a second language fluently or if you played an instrument really, really seriously for a long time or maybe a sport really, really seriously for a long time, you'll be familiar with the ... I haven't done that in a long time, but if I was to pick it up, it would be rusty, but I would get there pretty quickly, right? Maybe physically, I wouldn't be as strong as I was or whatever, but I would get there. You can do that with writing code.

(00:21:58):
You can do that with technical skills if you do it for long enough, I think you can develop sort of a baseline mastery, where you're not going to be as fast and a lot of the challenges of being technical is actually in all the tooling and all the tooling evolution, but you're not going to be necessarily as fast as people who have been doing it, but you won't be completely clueless and I think that all the things you learn getting to that really comfortable mastery of some part of hands-on tech will stay with you and will help you just maintain a level of confidence in your own technical know-how and maintain a level of empathy for what it means to be a good engineer.

(00:22:38):
And I think just make you a lot less anxious about being hands-off, even though I think everybody who makes that transition for a year or two, especially if you're really have to be hands-off or you just don't have time to write code at all, you are going to be anxious for a while no matter what. The things to then think about from that point is, being technical is also just about knowing what's going on and paying attention and being able to ask ... what people care about with technical leaders in my experience is they want people who actually seem like they sort of understand what you're doing and can ask good questions and help guide you to better decisions without actually being the one who's like, "Oh no, you need to use this library instead of that library."

(00:23:25):
It's actually sort of annoying when somebody that's very senior and hands-off tries to tell you, don't use this library, use that library because I don't know about you, but I don't really believe people who have been hands-off for that long when they try to tell me what to do and the thing that I'm kind of the expert in right now, but I do appreciate it when I'm given more guidance around, well, have you considered this? Tell me about how you're planning to handle that situation. What are the major technical challenges with implementing this and that can actually spend the time to listen and ask thoughtful questions on the back of that.

(00:24:00):
The last thing I would say is surround yourself with smart technical people, also as much as you can, and be willing to listen to them, talk about tech and ask them questions about things. I feel like that's part of the reason that I am able to stay technically savvy and credible amongst people who work for me is not that I'm writing code because I'm not. But I am listening to a lot of very smart people talk about technology a lot, down to the level of I'm trying to debug this database issue, what the heck is going on? And just constantly being interested in those stories and learning from them and learning what really smart engineers are thinking about and worrying about.

(00:24:47):
The more you can build that network of people that are still hands-on and stay in touch with that, I do think that helps a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:56):
So on my last point, how are you actually doing that? Is it watching ... going to conferences with friends, something else?

Camille Fournier (00:25:01):
Yeah, yeah. I mean, I guess for me it started with going to conferences, meeting people. Now, I'm in a lot of different chat groups where people are just sort of regularly communicating, staying in touch with ... staying in touch with former colleagues. I will admit I'm kind of a social person and I have a big network, so this may be easier said than done, but I do think being in the right group chats ... I also think, I'm sure reading various tech news and tech sort of commentary and discussion boards, I mean it's definitely a mixed bag of that stuff I think that like ... but there are smart people. You find the smart people in there, you sort of follow what they're saying. I think that's another good way to keep that perspective.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:51):
Is it a sign, I wonder if you're not interested in that anymore that maybe you should move into something else. I don't know. If you're like, don't really pay attention to engineering technicalness.

Camille Fournier (00:26:02):
It's hard for me to say because I'm such a nerd. I really love tech. I'm in this industry, because I'm just actually genuinely very interested in certain corners, not every corner of technology but certain corners of technology. I want to know what the latest stuff that's happening in databases and infrastructure and I find it all very interesting. I find the problems interesting. So I think that makes me very successful because I just have that natural curiosity and passion and interest in it. But I don't know that that's a total prerequisite.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:36):
Yeah, but you've been talking about ... it reminds me a little bit of this guy, LevelsIO on Twitter. Have you heard of this guy? He was just on Lex Friedman. Have you listened to that yet?

Camille Fournier (00:26:47):
I think maybe I saw a clip of it, but I haven't listened to it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:48):
So I think one of the most successful indie engineers where he just works on his own thing all by himself, never raises money, just launch his products that make money. And a funny thing about him is he works ... all stuff is in PHP and jQuery. He's just like, this works. I've always had this to do, learn Node.js, learn Python. And I'm like, I'm too busy to build ... while I'm building to learn these new things and he's been incredibly successful. So it touches on sometimes maybe you don't need to just keep rewriting to the newest frameworks.

Camille Fournier (00:27:15):
Yeah, no, I mean look, I actually ... I feel like I know a lot of smart engineers who are in that category. They're like, we built amazing things in PHP and relatively simple SQL and so much of tech is over-engineering things and I don't totally disagree. I think the challenge is though, of course, what works as a one person show, doesn't always work in a scaled organization for better or for worse, we're in different like, you've got to match what makes one person really productive. Will it make 100 people, 1000 people, even 10 people really productive? That's always a little hard to tell and that's why I do think you should be not ... I think it's always a good idea to be keeping up with what's happening and what's changing in whatever kind of side of tech you're in, but not obsessively chasing every fad.

(00:28:15):
I think being aware of, but not necessarily chasing them, but particularly, if you're working in groups, teams, larger companies, even midsize companies, there is some amount of, you're balancing the tech that makes one person go fast with the tech that makes 10 or 100 people go fast and those are not always exactly the same thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:35):
Just to kind follow this thread a little bit and to kind of nerd snipe you a little bit, is there a platform or language or framework these days that you're either very excited about that you think is helping people move faster and do better work or the opposite just like this is ... everyone is excited but this is not good.

Camille Fournier (00:28:52):
I will say this, one example I actually put in my own notes for this conversation was GraphQL. I would not tell a team to use or not use GraphQL at this point because it's a bit out of my expertise zone and my level of management. It's not really my job anyway, but it is one of the things that is both popular and thought relatively poorly of by most of the senior people that I know. And so, I guess I would say that's one where I would say if you're seriously thinking about it and you're not Facebook, you may really want to make sure you know what problem you're trying to solve because the impression that I have from sort of listening to people talk about it is that GraphQL is kind of trying to promise front-end engineers that they don't really have to collaborate with backend engineers.

(00:29:49):
And they can just sort of build whatever and it'll all be fine, and it just doesn't ever seem to work out that well for anybody who actually does it in practice. Again, obviously, it can work out that well because Facebook has made a great go of it. I'm sure there are other companies that are, but that's one where it's not that new but it remains one of these things where it seems like an interesting fad that maybe is burning a lot of people.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:13):
That's awesome. I appreciate you sharing that. I don't know if this is exactly an example of this, but on that podcast levels, I forget his actual name, Peter I think, shared that whenever there's a framework that has a VC funded startup behind it, that's not a good sign because their job now is to convince engineers to use it and then pay for it and that's not necessarily going to be the best product.

Camille Fournier (00:30:34):
That's true. Although I will say that some of the most time-wasting frameworks have also just come out of big companies, or the context of the big company that may have made that framework super useful within that context doesn't translate to startup or small company or even big company that doesn't have the rest of the context set, but I don't think ... He's not wrong. I also just think big companies share the blame on that one.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:05):
I guess we should all just come back to PHP and jQuery and be simple.

Camille Fournier (00:31:09):
Maybe.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:10):
Okay, so to close out this thread on engineering leaders, finding the right balance, just to summarize your advice here. One is get to mastery before and is your advice here, get to this point before you move into engineering.

Camille Fournier (00:31:23):
Engineering management. I will say part of this is also in particular, if you happen to be a woman or otherwise, underrepresented person in tech because people will tend to underestimate your technical abilities just unfortunately as a get-go. I also think it's particularly important to kind of develop that internal confidence in your abilities before you make this sort of scary leap, which is scary for everyone of have a ... if you have that mastery before you make the leap, I wish more people would do this because honestly, I do think there are a lot of people who never really gained the mastery. They go into management, they lose it and some of them are still perfectly good managers and look, there are good managers who were never technical to begin with.

(00:32:09):
I don't want to say that that's impossible. I just think that if you care about being technical, if you are technical now and you want to maintain that tech-savvy, don't just become a manager the first time somebody offers it to you. Make sure you've really spent your good time writing code.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:28):
Is there a number of years heuristic you think about or some way to tell you that maybe you've hit that point?

Camille Fournier (00:32:34):
I think this has been since disproven, but it was that 10,000 hours idea of mastery at some point. For me, it was like an undergraduate degree, a graduate degree, and four or five years of full-time work. So maybe I might be slow. I didn't start coding a lot in middle school like people might do now, but I felt like ... I took several years of hands-on work in a very intense undergraduate and graduate programs for me. So I do think it's probably somewhere in the 10-year range of really having spent a lot of your time over those years writing code and really understanding how to be a technical expert.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:17):
Got it. So essentially if you're thinking about moving into management as an engineer, you may want to wait until you've done it for 10 years in some form, which I think is a lot longer than a lot of people would've thought. And I imagine many people are not doing that. And then, in your experience not doing it as well, it could be-

Camille Fournier (00:33:35):
If you were programming a lot in high school and you got an undergraduate degree, so let's say you've got six years-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:42):
I see.

Camille Fournier (00:33:42):
You may only need four or five years of work, 40 hour a week writing code experience. I'm sure it depends on the company, but I do think when you see people that are 23, they are just out very recently out of school, it's a different thing if you're a founder and that's a whole different life, but if you're at a big company and somebody is like you have great communication skills, why don't you start to become a manager? Often they're actually pushing you to become a project manager, which is actually also the worst sort of path to real leadership in my opinion. If you don't feel like you're done ... Also, if you just don't feel like you're done, if you're still having fun writing code, don't rush becoming a manager, writing code is awesome. Have fun, enjoy it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:29):
I know exactly what you mean. So I used to be an engineer, actually I was an engineer for 10 years. I definitely don't have mastery at this point. I moved into product from that and I definitely so missed actually just sitting there and writing code and building stuff, that was very hard to give up. I imagine you still missed that.

Camille Fournier (00:34:45):
I think I might've forgotten about it at this point, but there is nothing as satisfying because you get the fast feedback loop. It's just wonderful. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:34:56):
This episode is brought to you by Coda. I use Coda every day to coordinate my podcasting and newsletter workflows from collecting questions for guests to storing all my research to managing my newsletter content calendar, Coda is my go-to app and has been for years. Coda combines the best of documents, spreadsheets and apps to help me get more done and Coda can help your team to stay aligned and ship faster by managing your planning cycle in just one location. Set and measure OKRs with full visibility across teams and stakeholders, map dependencies, create progress visualizations, and identify risk areas.

(00:35:31):
You can also access hundreds of pressure tested templates for everything from roadmap strategy, to final decision-making frameworks. See for yourself why companies like DoorDash, Figma and Qualtrics run on Coda. Take advantage of this special limited-time offer just for startups. Head over to coda.io/lenny and sign up to get six free months of the team plan. That's coda.io/lenny to sign up and get six months of the team plan, coda.io/lenny. On the topic of moving into management, you wrote maybe the definitive book on engineering manager career path, and so when someone moves from IC to management, what do you find is the most surprising thing to them? What do they most often not understand or are surprised by like, "Oh man, I did not see this as part of my job or my life."

Camille Fournier (00:36:24):
Yeah, I mean I think there's a few things. I do think ... assuming that they're actually trying to do it well, I do think there are a lot of people who move into management and then just don't really understand the job at all and aren't even self-aware enough to know that they don't understand it, but for those who are trying to do it, trying to do it well. I think a few things that tend to surprise them are the fact that you really don't own your time as a manager. Your team and your management and the company owns your time. More and more the more senior you become as a manager. I think individual contributors often think that if they become a manager, they will still have some of the freedom that they have as a senior individual contributor.

(00:37:08):
But then they'll also be able to tell people what to do and they'll have all this authority. And the reality is, management is much more ... I'm not a huge fan of servant leadership exactly, but management really is a service job. You are serving the team, you are serving the company. Your job is to help make things better and that usually doesn't mean that you're making all the decisions. It usually doesn't mean that you snap your fingers and people jump. Because if you try that, especially in tech, right? People are just going to revolt. They're not going to listen to you. It's just too hard to have ... that's not the culture that we live in.

(00:37:53):
And I don't think that's a good culture. I don't think that command and control, I tell you what to do and you do it. It just doesn't create creativity, right? It's the same thing as like PMs, trying to have all the ideas, right? No, you've got all these brilliant people working for you on a team, your job as a manager is not to tell them what to do in every single case. Occasionally, yes, a lot more. If you're trying to convince them of what you think should happen. In some ways, you're sort of nudging, you're encouraging, you're directing, you're setting guardrails for processes or behaviors or whatever, but it's not this glorious fearless leader.

(00:38:36):
I make all these decisions and everyone looks up to me and it's awesome kind of job. It's much more grueling, much more ... you are really just sort of reacting to things in the moment. And it can be very ... it's a hard job. I do think particularly management when done well, when you're really trying to do it in a thoughtful kind, but also, productive way is a very hard job.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:06):
I wonder if engineering is where most ... where the highest percentage of people that move into management move back to IC. I've seen that a bunch and I wonder if engineers are the most common.

Camille Fournier (00:39:16):
I don't know, but-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:18):
After realizing what you just said is true, like, "Oh, what I done-"

Camille Fournier (00:39:22):
So do you not think product managers also do this? Because I think product managers also actually suffer from exactly this kind of-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:28):
They do.

Camille Fournier (00:39:28):
Maybe sometimes-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:28):
They do.

Camille Fournier (00:39:28):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:30):
But interestingly, I was an engineering manager earlier in my career. I really did not like it. I was very unhappy in that role. As a PM manager though, I was very happy, it was a lot easier.

Camille Fournier (00:39:43):
Yeah, because PMs are way easier to manage. PMs are awesome to manage. PMs want to ... they're just so helpful. They want to do this ... they're good communicators. I love managing PMs. I have to say, I have to say, just my experience, engineers are such a pain. They're all primadonnas. I am an engineer, but PMs are more fun to manage my experience. So actually, you have a point. You have a point.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:12):
But I wonder. Yeah, because I haven't seen a lot of PM managers move back to IC product management. I find that once you can build product through teams and not sit there all day in Excel and check in on deadlines and things, it's hard to give that part up. You kind of enjoy being higher up in that chain. Yeah. Kind of along these lines, something that you have a really interesting perspective on is one-on-ones. Most people are like have one-on-ones with everyone, have them regularly, they're really important. You actually have this contrarian take that maybe you should have less one-on-ones, especially as an engineering manager, you talk about that.

Camille Fournier (00:40:46):
Yeah, so to be clear, you should have one-on-ones with your direct reports and your manager and you should hold those sacred ... I tend to do my weekly or maybe every other week. So this is not about that set of one-on-ones. So the one-on-ones of the people that you are directly managing and with your own manager. But I think there is this ... I don't know if it's the remote work, sort of explosion that's happened or it's big companies or what, but what I've seen and I've heard a lot of friends at many companies complain about is this idea that everybody is doing one-on-ones with everyone else. So the manager is doing one-on-ones with their team. They're also doing one-on-ones with all of their peers.

(00:41:35):
They're doing one-on-ones with all of their stakeholders. They're doing one-on-ones with product and design. And I think that it's just not a scalable approach, right? Linearly scale with the number of relationships you have. And so, as your company grows, as the number of things your team supports grow, as the team grows, you just can't scale that way. You cannot expect to maintain a one-on-one approach to kind of organizational relationship building and awareness passed a fairly small team/company. I also think that people think that one-on-ones will solve all of their problems. And I think the reality is you have this one-on-ones with people that don't really want to have a one-on-one with you.

(00:42:30):
If they're not in the mind to invest in your relationship, if they don't really care about what you're doing, they actually may not like it that you're asking them for a one-on-one, let me show up like, because it's like, okay, well I should do this to be a good corporate citizen or whatever. But they're just like, why are we doing this? What is the point of this? I also think that one-on-ones, particularly when you use them first of stakeholder management. So when you're meeting with people that's not your team, but other stakeholders that you may need to deal with, if you have a lot of stakeholders ... so I've been in a lot of positions where I have a lot of internal stakeholders because I build internal platforms is a big part of what my job has been in the last many years.

(00:43:07):
Having all these meetings as one-on-ones with those stakeholders can actually be kind of a weakness because when your stakeholders just tell you in a one-on-one that they're happy or unhappy with things, your unhappy stakeholders aren't hearing that. So you may have one really unhappy stakeholder and five really happy ones and all you're saying to your unhappy one is, "Well, everybody else is happy and they're not seeing it for themselves." And they're just having to say, "Trust me, because I've had these other one-on-ones with all these people and they're saying it's fine." And it just kind of sounds whiny.

(00:43:37):
And so, when you're dealing with a lot of stakeholders and trying to just rely on one-on-one management of that is actually not very productive in a lot of ways. So in general, I guess I just think people should respect their own time more. As much as I just said management, you're kind of at everyone's mercy and that is true, but also respect your time. Don't just load yourself up with meetings because you're a manager and that's your job. Do you really have something to talk to a person about? Do you really need to ... when you have a one-on-one meeting with someone, you are asking for their time. You shouldn't just be doing that kind of haphazardly for fun.

(00:44:24):
This is a little bit of my personality. I'm not a great company networker. Some people are really good at just like, let's go to get coffee, let's go to lunch and let's hang out and build a relationship. And honestly, those people are really successful in many ways that I am not. I do sort of envy that skill. I'm really good if I work with you. If I work with you on something, generally speaking, people really come to respect me because I'm very engaged and I'm a really good collaborator in various ways, but I'm really bad at just getting to know you random one-on-one, where we don't have a purpose to the meeting.

(00:44:57):
And that's not to say those are always bad, but I do think that a lot of people with ... that's your comfort zone, if that getting to know you, random, relationship building one-on-one is your comfort zone, I should probably do more of them. You should probably do fewer of them because you should always be pushing yourself to get out of your comfort zone and are you really getting something out of that or are you just being able to tick a checkbox that says, I had eight meetings today, therefore I was productive.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:26):
Yeah, that super resonates. Kind of pulling on this thread of how you operate and how you work something that I've heard you're really known for, is creating a work culture where people work really hard but also, have a really good work-life balance. And when we were chatting, you, you actually told me you're not a great believer in working too hard. Can you just talk about this philosophy on building a great culture where people don't work too hard but also, get stuff done and don't burn out?

Camille Fournier (00:45:51):
I think we all understand that if we could just figure out and focus on really the most important things, we would just ... everything would be better. And it's hard to figure out what the most important things are, but overwork kind of lets you just sidestep doing the hard work of figuring out what's important in the first place. I listened to one of your podcasts where you talked to someone who said, if you've never fired someone and regretted it, you don't know where the line is, of who you should and shouldn't buy. And I will admit I have mixed feelings about that, although I get what you're saying. If you don't regularly reset your expectations of what you should and shouldn't let slide, do you have any idea where the line of what is actually important to work on is?

(00:46:41):
I just think ... and the thing about that is it's not like firing people where you do it once or twice and you regret it and you learn pretty quickly, unfortunately. I think you actually have to kind of regularly test the circumstances and challenge with, am I really getting the most out of myself? Am I really producing the best value or am I just making ... swaging my internal guilt about I need to work 60-hour weeks, I need to sleep in the office, I need to whatever, to show that I'm a hard worker and I care. And so, I guess I do really think that people should challenge themselves to be focused and get the important stuff done and always be asking themselves what is important to do?

(00:47:37):
And what's important to do does change over time. But if you're not regularly doing an audit of your time and trying to knock things off that list that don't matter, you're probably wasting a lot of time on things that don't matter and okay, you don't want to work less. You love working a lot, that's fine, but you could probably just be getting a lot more valuable stuff done if you would do these audits regularly, right? I also think people don't delegate enough. So, if you don't delegate, then you get overwhelmed because your team doesn't know how to do anything, because you haven't bothered to spend the time delegating, which actually takes more time initially, usually, you have to teach people whatever it is that you're trying to get them to do.

(00:48:19):
Not always, sometimes they'll surprise you and they're better at it than you are, but maybe not. And so, you have to teach them, but then you finally ... you freed yourself up to scale. So I guess I'm just a real believer that working hard and a focused way for over fewer hours I think is a more productive way to approach work. And I think I have lived my career that way. I've been successful in it and I have encouraged it and people who have worked for me, and I think I've seen a lot of success through it, but it's not a thoughtless exercise. It's an active process of constant reflection to get to that focus.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:11):
For someone that is listening to this and is like, I want to start doing this, is there anything ... any specific practice you've found useful or any specific tactic to actually do this well?

Camille Fournier (00:49:23):
I think there's different approaches you could take, right? One approach you could take is just like every Friday I'm going to stop working at 4 PM or something, let's say, and I am not, or I'm not going to let myself work this weekend. Forcing yourself to log off, forcing yourself to have boundaries and saying ... and then doing out of what did I get done, I think can help. That's scary. And people don't like doing that, but I do think that that's one of the best ways to do it is really just saying, I'm going to log off. I'm going to log off every day this week at 6 PM. I'm going to ... because your brain is probably going to keep thinking.

(00:50:10):
You might still be a little stressed out, you're still thinking about work, you're still worrying about it, but there is a difference between thinking about it and doing it, and particularly for those of you who are earlier in your careers, this was actually, I think one of the reasons that I did get to mastery was because I was extremely good at being focused when I was at work, when I was a hands-on programmer and really writing code for many of the hours of the day. And that meant I was not ... this was pre heavy social media. I was much less distracted, which I don't know if I would be able to do it in the modern era as easily, but having that real heavy focus time because I was like, "I don't want to work on the weekend. I don't want to stay here until 9 PM every night. I just want to get this done." And it meant that I didn't do quite as many copies.

(00:50:58):
I didn't go to lunch and chat with people all every day, but I was very, very productive and I learned to get a lot done in a short period of time. And I do think learning those skills earlier in your career and then continuing to apply them throughout your career is another piece of advice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:16):
In terms of staying and getting focused, is there anything that helps you focus? Is it like headphones, a drink? What gets you in the zone?

Camille Fournier (00:51:24):
I mean, yeah, I have a lot of rituals. I have my caffeination rituals.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:31):
Say more.

Camille Fournier (00:51:32):
Well, I mean I can't drink coffee anymore because my stomach got messed up at some point, but I drink tea in the morning. I drink caffeinated water also. I have a Diet Coke at lunch, so I have these rituals of my caffeine hits that help me. I have to be in a quiet place. I do find non-music that is ... I really like Four Tet, for example, as music to focus or the new Andre 3000 Flute album is extremely good for focusing, where it's not quite predictable, no lyrics and not quite predictable. For me, that helps me focus a lot. I can't be listening to any words and focus. My brain just cannot ignore words. So those are some of the things I use to help folks.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:24):
That is awesome. I have a similar caffeine strategy. I'm drinking tea always during these podcasts and this little thing I got here and then, my wife doesn't want me to drink Diet Coke because she thinks the sugar and it is not good, but I still drink it sometimes and it works great. I switched to green tea. That's my approach. Start with black tea and then switch to green tea.

Camille Fournier (00:52:40):
That's smart.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:41):
Man, there's so many things you shared that I wanted to dig into. Let me share a couple of things. Your point about delegating I thought was really important, and there's another benefit to learning to delegate, which is team members feel empowered. You give them a chance to take on responsibility and they feel like I have an opportunity to show I can do this other thing.

Camille Fournier (00:53:02):
Yeah, and you're never going to scale if you don't delegate.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:06):
Yeah, and it's hard to start learning to do that, but once you get good at it, it becomes so great. I love just delegate everything every time, and people enjoy it. They're like, "Amazing. You're giving me opportunity." The thing you said about how ... if you're not sometimes regretting something you cut or potentially firing someone you don't regret, Elon actually, Elon Musk has a great approach to this. I don't know if you've heard his philosophy on optimizing. He has this whole five-step process of figuring out how to optimize something, and one of them is try to cut things like, do we need this thing or not? And if you don't recognize that 10% of stuff you cut, it was a mistake, you're probably not cutting enough stuff.

Camille Fournier (00:53:45):
You'll have to figure out your own metrics. But I definitely think testing the limits, it's scary though. I'm going to be honest. Doing that is always scary. It brings up like, I forgot to finish the assignment nightmares of school, especially for the overachievers that often end up in these kinds of companies and jobs. Again, you got to do things that scare you or you're never going to grow.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:14):
Okay, I'm going to go in a whole different direction. You've got a book coming out about platform engineering and platform teams. This is something that I get a lot of questions about. A lot of people are thinking about moving to a platform team or struggling working on a platform team or struggling working with a platform team. So I have a bunch of questions along these lines. The first is I asked a bunch of people that worked with you what to ask you and someone that worked with you shared this quote about his frustration working with platform teams that he's often complaining to you about and he works on customer-facing products. And so, he said platform teams that are often slow.

(00:54:48):
They're often pushing us to compromise on features to adopt their systems. They often get infinite funding even though they don't have to show any ROI. And so, maybe from the perspective of working with a platform team, say you're building something customer-facing, any tips for effectively working with a platform team and building a great relationship there.

Camille Fournier (00:55:08):
I'm very sympathetic to anybody who feels that way because part of the reason that I wrote this book, I co-wrote it with a friend, Ian Nolan, is that so many platform teams are guilty of all the things that he's complaining about, that my friend was complaining about, that they don't listen, they're not delivering effectively, they're not explaining their value to the company. And it is infuriating when you're dealing with that. And honestly, I'm very sympathetic. The thing that I would say though is the more you can, first of all, spend the time understanding that the platform team's problems a little bit and trying to collaborate and work with them and be clear about what it is you actually need and how you're willing to work with them, I think the better.

(00:56:01):
I think if you get mad and you just try to avoid them or undermine them or whatever, that may work in the long run, but it's just going to make everything worse in the short run. So I do think that if you've got a platform team that you're frustrated with, some tips, I would put are like, "Look, find the parts of that team that are good because I'm sure there are some," right? Maybe the databases team is awesome. And really make sure you are maintaining a good relationship with that part of the team and you can point to how you are collaborating extremely well with that part of the team. Help give them product feedback.

(00:56:44):
This is annoying but sometimes needs to happen because a lot of companies, I actually think product ... you need to have a product mindset and frankly, you need to have product managers to build good platforms, internal platforms. A lot of companies just don't do this. They don't believe that they should waste head count on product managers for internal teams. So you end up with this platform team that has a lot of smart engineers, but they don't really know what to build. So they're just sort of building whatever they think is right. And so sometimes your job is to product manage them, is to tell them, these are the problems that we have and this is what we need.

(00:57:16):
And the clearer you can be about that, particularly when they don't have a product team, oftentimes, you can kind of lead them from the side in that way. And so I think that's another approach that I would take when you're in that situation. Find the parts of the team that are working and working well with your team and make sure you develop those relationships and try to just get over the anger and frustration and just be clear about what it is that you need and help them understand what they should really be doing and building.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:48):
That is really interesting advice. So especially, you're saying if they don't have a PM helping, make sure they're guiding things well, is you can help them ... basically help them think through stuff that will benefit them and also, help the stuff that you're trying to get done.

Camille Fournier (00:58:03):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:04):
That's awesome advice. Okay, so what about from the leadership perspective, trying to build an effective platform team, do you have any advice on how to structure these teams and incentivize these teams to help them be successful?

Camille Fournier (00:58:17):
First of all, I'm a very strong believer that platform engineering has to involve software engineering. If you don't have any software engineers on your platform team and you only have more operations systems engineers, DevOps, SRE, which I realize there are some SREs that are software engineers, but they tend to not want to write big software. I think you're kind of missing the picture. Platform engineering is not just maintaining cloud infrastructure and doing small scripts or blueprints or enablement projects for other teams, because that doesn't really create a cohesive and coherent platform. It doesn't create products and frankly you need to be ... platforms are products, ultimately.

(00:59:04):
You should be thinking about how do I create coherent offerings that make this company more productive? So you need software engineers. Yes, you need sort of operations systems, SRE specialists as well. And of course, you need product people. I had product teams on ... product managers for all of my platform teams. I've really developed out that practice in the companies that I've worked for doing this because I just believe that you're not going to get great results if you just believe that to engineers and engineering management. They will do their best and you do occasionally find engineers that have really great product instincts in this space, but the actual details.

(00:59:49):
And focus of the product work is just you can't write a bunch of code and/or manage a big software engineering team and be a product manager at the same time. That's actually just asking, I think, too much of people to do that really well, at least for very long. So I think when it comes to structuring a team, recognize this is not just like SRE V2. This is more than that. You want software engineers, you want systems engineers, you want product people. And then, one of the reasons you want product folks is because you want to be thinking about impact-based, outcome-based approaches, not just like, "Well, we built this thing that seemed cool, we adopted this technology from this company because that's what everybody on the internet is talking about."

(01:00:36):
Whether it's VC funded or big company. We actually thought about what are the problems the engineers at my company are facing? How can we improve their productivity or deliver leverage to this business through whatever it is we're building, right? Are we reducing the cycle time for engineering tasks? Are we solving problems that are preventing products from launching and scaling? Are we making really meaningful cost reductions or efficiencies and, in our products or in our platforms? These are some examples of measurable contributions, but I think one of the challenges is that people create these platform teams and think that they can be sort of divorced from having an impact focus because it's like, "Well, you just got to run the infrastructure and make sure it works."

(01:01:29):
And it's like, "No, you actually do still have to do ... if you do that OKR stuff or goal setting," or whatever, you've got to take a lot of the best practices of product. It's a little different in the internal world, but it's still very important if you want to do platforms.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:45):
On the line of having PMs within the platform teams. Some of the best PMs I've ever worked with where PMs on platform teams, and that just tells me, it's not like where you put PMs that are just meant like that's ... where you could have some of the highest leverage because platform teams enable the rest of the company to move faster.

Camille Fournier (01:02:01):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:02):
And one difference there, I'm curious if you agree, is your ratio of PM to engineer can be a lot higher. You can have a lot more engineers per PM on platform teams.

Camille Fournier (01:02:10):
Yeah. Yeah, I think that's right because I think so much of the work in a platform team is not exactly product work. A lot of it is like scaling or really deep kind of technical, like I got to figure out how to actually do this technical thing or I've got to do this performance efficiency and you don't always need a product spec for that, right? It is often just a very engineering heavy task. So yes, I think the ratios do tend to be a bit different.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:42):
We dove over right into this topic. Maybe it might be helpful to help people understand what is a platform team, just what are examples of teams that would be considered platform teams.

Camille Fournier (01:02:51):
I mean, I guess the high level definition that I have of platform engineering is if you are developing and operating platforms that ... where they're trying to manage overall system complexity and deliver leverage to your business. So a lot of the teams that people think about nowadays and when they're talking about platform teams, they're talking a lot about teams that may have formerly been called dev tools. For example, so your CI/CD tooling for the company, a lot of the cloud infrastructure provisioning and tooling. If you're at a company with certain technical problems, you may very well be building semi bespoke storage systems. For example, maybe part of your platform teams. I actually think that there are ... And then, actually web frameworks ... Web mobile framework and support for that.

(01:03:50):
That set of engineering can also be part of a platform offering. I actually kind of believe that there's also sort of what you might call integration platforms or platforms that are in between that infrastructurey developer tooly stuff and products. So billing platforms for example, if you have a single billing platform for all of the different products in your company, that shares a lot of overlaps in the challenges of those more dev tools, infrastructurey platform teams because you're probably supporting lots of different product lines that are using this system that needs to be able to scale with certain efficiencies. You need to still do the product discovery.

(01:04:33):
You probably have a little bit more of a business product focus than the pure internal tools teams, but that gets to the blended area.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:44):
For founders that are earlier stage or companies that are smaller hearing this and they're like, "Oh, shit do I need a platform team?" So yeah, you're shaking your head, if people aren't watching on YouTube. What's a sign that's time maybe to start creating a platform team and setting aside resources for something like that?

Camille Fournier (01:05:00):
So first of all, I think it gets to be like, you have 50 plus engineers. I don't think this is the kind of thing that you start when you are 10 engineers, right? But when you are ... so there's a lot of ad hoc coordination that's probably happening amongst your engineering groups right now, where maybe you just have one ... you have your GitHub and somebody is making sure that all of that stuff is sort of working. You have a few cloud databases and you got a couple of people on each team and they kind of share notes to figure out what's going on or whatever. Okay, it's all good, but at some point, you hit either a lot of inefficiency where you're seeing the same people across a bunch of different teams.

(01:05:54):
Each team has the same kind of people having to solve the same kinds of problems. It just seems like why do I have three people in every team, dealing with this instead of centralizing it and making it a little more efficient. It also could be that you hit some core scaling issue that starts to really need a dedicated team to solve. Again, that could be developer productivity. Every development team is trying to do it their own way and everybody is just super slow because you just can't get code released and it all has to be coordinated across every different team and it's just like, what is going on? We need to fix that or you actually have a technical challenging area that needs a focused team to fix the scaling.

(01:06:36):
Those are some of the signs that you may want to start thinking about a platform team, but it's really like ... generally speaking, I would not jump into it early. This is something for companies that have matured where it's worth investing and making people internally more productive and centralizing certain functions just from a cost and efficiency basis at minimum.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:02):
Say you're on a platform team, say you're an engineer or even a PM, any advice for how to be successful and thrive within that environment and be a great platform team.

Camille Fournier (01:07:11):
If you want to do platforms. If you're an engineer, certainly if you're an engineer or an engineering manager, you've got to remember that half of the work is actually the operational quality, operational excellence of these things. Platform engineering is not just writing code and then throwing it over the walls to someone. Being interested and passionate about the operational challenges and scaling bits of systems I do think is fairly important, if you want to be a great platform engineer from a software engineer perspective, if you're more like a product manager, "Look, you've got to really care about ..." I think you got to be really both interested in working with really smart engineers who are going to know way more than you do about things.

(01:08:06):
And almost being a really good, not necessarily zero to one but past one person because actually a lot of the best platform type offerings in companies start in individual application teams. An application team has a problem and they solve it for themselves and it turns out that that's actually a really good idea for how to solve that problem. So a good platform team is often looking around for those and then sort of taking them and then assimilating them and making them available to more and more people. And so, I think if you want to be in that kind of zero to one building the brand new stuff all the time, you may not be as happy in a platform team.

(01:08:45):
But if you're really interested a little bit more of taking things over, stabilizing, scaling them, making them efficient, making them evolve as a company evolves, I think you'll be happier in that circumstance.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:01):
Awesome. Is there anything else along these lines before we wrap up and yet a very exciting lightning round that you think might be helpful for folks working with platform teams or working on a platform team, building platform teams?

Camille Fournier (01:09:14):
I think there are two things that we haven't touched on or maybe three that are really hard about platform teams and that I think don't get much press, which is running platform projects is a little bit different than running agile projects. You can take a lot of the best practices you may have learned from agile type product delivery, but you are running longer, running larger scale, more complex builds because a lot of the stuff that you build at the platform level just takes longer. It's a little bit more complicated. So you've got to be willing to get into that kind of stuff, especially if you're in a management job in that space.

(01:09:55):
You are going to deal with a lot of migrations as well. So it is very annoying. Migrations happen, even if you don't force them on people, your a cloud provider is going to say, oh, you've got to migrate from EKS view 19 to 121 or whatever, and that may require changes in code and then that's a real pain in the butt for all of the application teams. So people who are interested in how to smooth over the customer and company impact of this underlying change, I think we'll be very happy in platform teams. If you're not interested in that, you may not enjoy the work as much. There's just a lot of detail oriented work and platforms. And then of course, the final part is the stakeholders are a nightmare. My friend who wrote the question about how his product or his platform partners drive him crazy. I have no doubt he drives them crazies.

(01:10:55):
Because you've got all of these stakeholders, your peers and tech, maybe product managers, maybe executives that are like, what is this team? Are they really worth the money? Why are we spending so much on it? I don't understand what they're doing. I could do it better in some cases. So there's actually a big part of the job, particularly as either product managers or engineering leadership is stakeholder management and really learning how to do that well. And that is not always, that's probably I think universally agreed to be the least fun part of the job. I don't think anybody loves it, but it is certainly a skill set. I'm glad that I have. And so, I think if you are thinking about building one of these teams.

(01:11:40):
And you're like, I can just do the fun tech stuff or the cool product stuff, I'm really passionate about engineering productivity or I'm really passionate about state scale storage systems and I don't want to think about any of the other stuff. You may not actually be happy in the long run in leadership positions. It may be fine as an individual contributor, but for leaders in particular, there's a lot more to it than the fun tech problems, the fun operations problems, even the product.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:07):
You said there's a few things we haven't touched on. Is there anything else?

Camille Fournier (01:12:13):
That's the fastest and anybody who's interested, my book will be coming out in the next couple of months from O'Reilly and covers all of this depth.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:22):
Yeah, is there a date specifically people should watch out for?

Camille Fournier (01:12:25):
I think it's actually pre-order on Amazon now. It's called Platform Engineering, and then, there's ... I think it's like a guide for technical product and people leaders, something like that. But I think the release ... I don't know exactly when the Kindle release will be, but we're still in copy edits, but it should be done pretty soon.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:42):
Okay, amazing. So you can pre-order it now. Rolling to it obviously in the show notes and description, it's called Platform Engineering. Before we get to a very exciting lightning round, I want to take us to a recurring segment on this podcast that I call AI Corner. AI is very top of mind for a lot of people and I'm always curious how people are finding it valuable in their work or in their life. So the question is there anything you've found AI to be helpful with ... in your AI work? Any way you use it in an interesting way?

Camille Fournier (01:13:11):
I find it helpful, for example, if I've written a sentence and I'm like, I like this sentence, but I feel like, I don't like the phrasing or the format that I've used, it needs to be edited, but I can't quite figure out how. I will often put it into ChatGPT and be like, "Can you reframe this? Can you rephrase this for me?" It doesn't always work well, but sometimes it does. It's like, "Oh yeah, if I just switched this around or changed this word choice, it's a much easier to read sentence." I do think it's ... I think it's just before that and small. I think it's large, lots of texts I haven't had as much luck with. I'm a little bit of an AI novice still, I would say.

(01:13:52):
What I will say is that AI is really bad, if you try to ask it for quotes or at least ChatGPT is. I haven't used a lot of the other ones that much. I actually saw there was some Twitter or some social media thing that's like, did Francis Ford Coppola get fake reviews from ChatGPT of the new, what is it, Agopolus.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:14):
Yeah.

Camille Fournier (01:14:14):
Agopolus maybe.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:14):
Yeah.

Camille Fournier (01:14:16):
And I was like, I actually had that scenario where I was like, I need a quote ... I was looking for quotes for the book and I was like, maybe ChatGPT knows, but I was like, "Can you give me any good quotes on ..." I forget what it was. Let's just say it was on managing complexity or something like that, and it gave me these really interesting quotes. I was like, that's great, but I better double check that. And they were not real. They were never real, not a single quote. And I'd be like, that's not actually a real quote. Yes, you're right. That's not, so here's a different one.

(01:14:45):
I was like, that's still not a real quote, so don't ask it for quotes because ... or if you do, make sure it's a real quote and not just an interestingly phrased ... I mean good summarization in some ways of the text, it was sort of quoting from, just not an actual quote.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:06):
That's a good reminder of just generally don't assume what it's telling is true. Generally, it's not giving you real things. It's making things up and usually they're right, but often they might not be right. That's a really good reminder. On that first tactic, is there a prompt that you find helpful for how to actually feed it in there? Is it just here's a line, help me come up with a better version of it?

Camille Fournier (01:15:26):
No, I have not figured out the prompt engineering thing at all. I tried to get it to summarize a paper for me the other day, and it literally gave me the summary of a different paper, and then I asked friends and they were like, "Well, here's a summary." I was like, "Actually, that seems like a good summary." And they're like, "Well, first I told the AI that it was an expert in the field and that it needed to read carefully and that it was really smart," and I'm just like, how do I have to manage the machine? I already have to manage all of these humans? Why are you making me manage machines now too, please?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:00):
I thought this was going to solve all of our problems. Yeah, that role. There's an acronym for how to approach engineering, and there's always like give it the role. Here's the role you're going to play for me. You are an amazing writer and here's what I want from you. Yeah. I'm also very bad at it. By the way, Claude I here is really good at writing. That's one of its superpowers, so if you want to try writing, that's worth trying. Claude by Anthropic. On the second point you made of fake quote. So, yeah, Francis Ford Coppola is coming out with this movie with ... As you mentioned, this trailer is just full of all these quotes that people supposedly said about all his other movies that Godfather and stuff. And they're all like, these are terrible ... They're all terribly mean quotes about his movies.

(01:16:41):
It turns out, yeah, they're all not real quotes, and they actually took down the trailer, I just read because he's just making up quotes by famous critics.

Camille Fournier (01:16:49):
Well, so maybe-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:50):
Maybe it was ChatGPT.

Camille Fournier (01:16:54):
You can get fooled. I don't know if it was ChatGPT or a cheeky intern or something, but we can get-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:16:58):
Or very intentional marketing stint.

Camille Fournier (01:17:04):
Or that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:04):
Yeah. Anyway, with that Camille, we have reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Camille Fournier (01:17:08):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:09):
Amazing. Okay. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Camille Fournier (01:17:15):
So the first one is, What Got You Here Won't Get You There. I love it. I think anybody who is trying to challenge themselves and grow, should read it, it's fantastic. The second one is called When Things Fall Apart by Pema Chodron. That is when you are ... For me anyway, when I am struggling with whatever circumstances around me, I find it a very soothing or reminder that life is hard and the best way to ... you just sort of have to breathe with it and be with it and let it remind you of how life is hard for everyone and sort of make you a kinder person in the process.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:04):
Is there a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Camille Fournier (01:18:08):
I loved Alien Romulus. It was great. If you like a scary alien movie, fantastic.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:15):
I hate scary movies, so that's a new Alien movie. Okay.

Camille Fournier (01:18:18):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:18):
Anyone know there was a new Alien movie.

Camille Fournier (01:18:19):
I loved it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:21):
Awesome. Is there a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really love, whether it's an app or even physical product?

Camille Fournier (01:18:27):
So I don't know about recent, I'm a big Whoop fan. I got it during the pandemic and it is one of my ... I'm just a weird fan girl for it. I don't know. I just really ... I enjoy it. I use it every day. Maybe it's totally inaccurate, but it seems accurate enough and I just find it a very interesting and cool product.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:48):
I know Whoop product, people listen to this podcast, so I think they'll be happy to hear that. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, share with friends or family, find useful and work around life?

Camille Fournier (01:18:59):
If you don't challenge yourself, if you don't take risks, you'll never grow. That's a big one. I think you've got to ... challenging yourself, taking risks is how you grow. I think the other one for me is stay curious. The more you can remember that there's more that you don't know than that you do know, and staying open-minded and being willing to be wrong, I think the happier you'll be and the better you'll be as a leader for sure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:29):
Final question, on the topic of working out, you're blocking it with your head generally during the podcast, when we moved ... Behind you is a very significant looking barbell set or dumbbell set, I don't know which one is which. Talk about your workout regimen or anything along the lines of how you work out.

Camille Fournier (01:19:48):
I have been lifting rates probably for longer than some of your podcast listeners have been alive, which says more about my age than anything else. So I used be ... I now have two kids, so I lift weights as sort of maintenance, but I used to be a very ... I could deadlift than twice my body weight and I was just a very, very strong person. Now of course, everybody is into weightlifting, which makes the gym really annoying. So partly why I have a set in here, a small set with a baby sized bar is ... so when I can't make it to the gym, I can at least lift a little bit at home.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:27):
What's your favorite workout, lifting wise?

Camille Fournier (01:20:29):
I love really basic deadlift, squat, overhead press, that kind of very simple, the classic lifts.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:39):
Amazing. Camille, this is awesome. As everything, I was hoping it'd be, we covered so much stuff. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, follow up on stuff and check out your books and how can listeners be useful to you?

Camille Fournier (01:20:51):
Yes, so with the weird state of social media now, that's actually a harder question to answer than it normally is. I am on LinkedIn, so you can always follow me on LinkedIn and I'll probably ... I haven't traditionally put that much there, but I'm expecting I'll probably start putting more there in the coming months. I also still use Medium when I write. I actually like Medium, so medium.com, scamille is my username. Those are two good ways. I have a Twitter/X account that it is currently locked, and I may or may not unlock it at some point, but social media, as I said, has gotten weird. So I think probably LinkedIn is the easiest way for this kind of stuff.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:33):
And I read somewhere that scamille is rooted in your love of ska music back when you were younger. Is that right?

Camille Fournier (01:21:39):
It's true, yes. It was from high school. I was a big ska fan.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:43):
It's funny how our usernames just stick from, we were really young and that's the way we're represented online now forever.

Camille Fournier (01:21:49):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:50):
That's absurd. And then, you didn't answer my final question, which is how can listeners be useful to you?

Camille Fournier (01:21:55):
I have a new book coming out. I have another book that I've already written. Obviously, I love it when people buy my books so I love when people share my books with other people. My first book is translated into a bunch of languages, which is super exciting, and I hope that if you read it and enjoy it and learn something from it, you will let me know. Tag me on some social media. I think that's just awesome and stay tuned. Look, if you are looking for people potentially to come talk to your company about platform engineering, I could be interested in that, but I always love to meet interesting people. If you're in New York, reach out, who knows. This has been an amazing, amazing time getting to chat with you, Lenny. Thank you so much for inviting me on the show.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:42):
I feel the same way. Thank you for agreeing to come on the show, Camille, you're awesome. Thank you so much for being here.

Camille Fournier (01:22:48):
Take care.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:49):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

David Singleton (00:00:00):
The way we think about product development at Stripe, it really is to find the correct set of early users to kind of co-create the product with. Maybe the best example of that is Stripe billing. When we got to starting the Stripe billing product, we realized that there were a number of our existing users, these were companies like Figma and Slack, were already using Stripe for payments, but had these subscriptions business models. And we figured that there were going to be many more of these kind of companies into the future. And we could see that they were really kind of pushing the boundaries of what was possible here.

(00:00:32):
So we decided to co-create the product with them. So we had shared Slack channels, we'd actually show them product on a very regular basis, get their feedback on it. And only when that original kind of Alpha group was super, super happy with the product did we then think it might be ready to go to a broader audience. So that is just how we build product at Stripe. And that means that every engineer building product at Stripe really has many of the kind of attributes and will exercise many of the attributes that'll you often find in PMs in other companies.

Lenny (00:01:04):
Welcome to Lenny's podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard experiences building and growing today's most successful product. Today my guest is David Singleton. David is chief technology officer at Stripe where he's responsible for guiding its engineering and design teams, a role he's had for over five years. Prior to Stripe, David was VP of engineering at Google where he spent over a decade. And in hearing from David, you'll quickly be able to tell how passionate he is about the craft of building great products and building great teams. We dig into Stripe's unique approach to hiring, how they built a very product oriented engineering team, which allowed them to hold off on hiring their first product manager for many, many years, how they operationalize their operating principle of be meticulous in your craft, including a number of fascinating internal processes like engineer occasions, walking the store and something called friction logging.

(00:01:59):
David also shares what it takes to run an engineering culture with the uptime and scale requirements of Stripe, plus how AI is already impacting how they work and lessons around leadership management and planning. I'm so thankful David carved out time to come on the podcast and I know that you'll learn something valuable from it. With that, I bring you David Singleton after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:02:22):
This episode is brought to you by Mixpanel offering powerful self-serve product analytics. If you listen to this podcast, you know that it's really hard to build great product without making compromises. And when it comes to using data, a lot of teams think that they only have two choices. Make quick decisions based on gut feelings or make data driven decisions at a snail's pace. But that's a false choice. You shouldn't have to compromise on speed to get product answers that you can trust. With Mixpanel, there are no trade-offs. Get deep insights at the speed of thought at a fair price that scales as you grow. Mixpanel builds powerful and intuitive product analytics that everyone can trust, use and afford. Explore plans for teams of every size and see what Mixpanel can do for you and mixpanel.com. And while you're at it, they're hiring. Check out mixpanel.com to learn more.

(00:03:13):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo's the next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams, companies like DraftKings, Zapier ClickUp, Twitch and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool.

(00:03:40):
When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage. Eppo does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic, click through metrics and instead use your North Star metrics like activation, retention, subscription and payments. Eppo supports tests on front end, on the backend, email marketing, even machine learning claims. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, that's geteppo.com and 10 X your experiment velocity. David, welcome to the podcast.

David Singleton (00:04:25):
Thanks for having me, Lenny. It's great to be here.

Lenny (00:04:27):
I know Stripes Sessions is coming around the corner in later next week and I imagine it's a pretty hectic time for you. And so I just want to extra appreciate you making time for this in the middle of all that.

David Singleton (00:04:38):
Thank you. Well, it's a pleasure. It's a lot of fun. Stripe Sessions is our annual user conference, so we get together a bunch of folks from businesses building on Stripe and it's a great opportunity both to share what we've been up to over the last year, but also just learned a lot from them about what they would like to see us doing. And so I find it very energizing. It is of course a lot of work to put it together. In particular, I'm spending a bunch of time getting some demos together today, which I love building demos so, but it's a real pleasure to join you today.

Lenny (00:05:05):
So as I was preparing for this conversation, I kind of realized that the Stripe alumni are just killing it on this podcast, both in terms of the number of people that have come from Stripe and also just in terms of the quality and the popularity of some of the episodes. So folks like Claire Hughes Johnson, and Shreyas Doshi and Eeke. And my first question essentially, what is it that you all do that allows you to attract hire, close, keep people of that caliber? And I'm not going to accept just we keep a high bar or we just spend a lot of time on hiring. I'm curious just like what is it that you all do that other companies don't do that's maybe unique to the way Stripe finds and hires?

David Singleton (00:05:44):
Well, yeah, I'd love to tell you more about how we find and hire people. I think it makes sense to kind of zoom out for a second because it's material here. So think about what Stripe is doing. Our core thesis is that the internet economy is going to be much bigger and more important in the future than it is today. And that's certainly played out over the last 10 years. And so we are really a business full of product minded builders who are seeking to make it easier for businesses to get started and to operate against that backdrop. And so we got started building a credit card payments API. Before Stripe came along, accepting credit card payments online was way too hard. You had to go talk to your bank, you had to maybe sign a contract with Visa, MasterCard. You then had to kind of string together all this very complicated infrastructure and it then put a bunch of kind of restrictions and requirements on the business.

(00:06:37):
And John and Patrick are our co-founders at a previous business and they tell this funny story actually, which is while they were building that company, they assumed, it was an internet company, they assumed the hardest thing was going to be putting together hardware in a data center. But it turned out because there were services like AWS around by then, that that was actually quite easy. However, when it came to accepting payments in that business, it was just as hard as they had expected building hardware to be. They had to actually deploy some physical hardware, they had to do a whole bunch of these partnerships and it was very difficult, especially as an upstart, folks that didn't have any reputation yet to kind of be taken seriously and be able to correct into that. And so that's kind of the inspiration behind Stripe. So we started out solving a really kind of important and profound problem for these businesses getting started and scaling and obviously taking a very developer-centric approach to that in the early days.

(00:07:24):
I think what's exciting to know about and important to know about next is as we've scaled, we really kind of figure out what to do based on paying really close attention to our users. Those are the businesses building on Stripe. What are they getting out of the products as they are today and what are the problems adjacent to the ones that we're already solving that they have to put a lot of their own energy into but really feel like they shouldn't and they'd like us to help. And when we find that confluence of kind of need and then adjacency to what we're already doing, that's usually our invitation to go and build the next layer of our economic infrastructure. So we think about what we do today is building economic infrastructure for the internet and beyond.

(00:08:03):
So to bring this back to how do we attract the right talent and why does this matter? First of all, a lot of people, most people I think come to Stripe because they see that there is this great opportunity to help businesses at scale. So it really is about taking part in a mission that matters and are really motivated by that idea that we spend a lot of time with our users, the folks that actually need our help and are guided by them. And that mindset I think attracts a certain kind of person who wants to take a lot of agency, wants to understand the problems deeply and come up with their own ideas about how to solve for them. Because we're building infrastructure, it's also our approach that we really do think that we can do the best work kind of behind the scenes. We don't have to be out having the splashy launch, but hopefully all of our users can and we are quietly working behind the scenes to make their businesses better and more effective over time.

(00:09:02):
And I think that attracts folks with a certain kind of mindset, which is the interest and kind of tenacity to dig into difficult problems that may not be obvious and obviously kind of attractive to everyone in the world then really plug away at them until we've made a tremendous amount of progress. And so it attracts folks that are long-term thinkers, that care about building and also actually want to work very collaboratively together. So when I think about what makes Stripe different to other companies, it really is this singularity of purpose. Our mission is increasing the GDP of the internet and building this financial infrastructure to do that and a tremendous amount of teamwork and collaboration to get that done. And so that attracts a certain kind of person. When we think about finding those people, we don't hide any of that. You have to care about that in order to, I think be excited about working at Stripe.

(00:09:55):
And so we work very hard to make it very clearer as we're bringing people in that that's what this is about. And to that end, we're often very patient when we're hiring. So especially for critical roles, leadership hiring in particular, we're happy to take our time and meet tens or hundreds of people. And then in particular, sometimes we'll meet someone that we think is a really good fit for a given role, but they're not available right now. And then we'll be patient. We'll keep building the personal relationship with them and oftentimes the moment in time comes when it makes sense for them to join. And in order to pull that off, it's also the case that hiring at Stripe is a very personal activity. So look, there are lots of other companies where recruiting is kind of like this machine. And by the way, we have an awesome recruiting team, but folks across the rest of the company partner very closely with our recruiting team.

(00:10:47):
So it's not like it's a machine that delivers new hires, then you're like, oh, well maybe this person is here and I can put them to use on that thing. Our managers spend a lot of time identifying exactly what they need for the various roles that we have and then getting to know the potential candidates, the people out there in the world that could do these jobs actually really go quite deep with them on why it might make sense for them to feel like number one, they can feel very personally fulfilled against that mission here. And then also why it represents a bigger opportunity for them than maybe anything else they can spend their time and attention on. And to that end, another thing that I think Stripe has definitely delivered for many, many people who join here is just, and I care about preserving this in the culture, is just tremendous learning opportunities.

(00:11:35):
Very, very many people at Stripe today are doing a quite different job to the one that they join for. In order to do that they've often had to learn a lot and stretch themselves into new areas. It's also the case that when you think about that financial infrastructure we're building, the space really rewards people who want to go and learn a ton of detail in how these systems that are not that popular or well understood in the broader world, how they actually work and assimilate just a lot of context. And then in particular, you can build better stuff. Right. You're sharing that context with each other and helping other people learn. And so I think that all ladders up to this kind of group of folks that you mentioned. And all the folks you mentioned are wonderful Stripes or former Stripes that come together in service of our users.

Lenny (00:12:22):
I always love to hear what people call their people internally. So Stripes. Good to know.

David Singleton (00:12:26):
That's right.

Lenny (00:12:28):
So just to summarize what you shared, which I was just writing as you were talking about the things that essentially help Stripe build this incredible team. A strong mission and a mission that draws people in that are incredible and people may be hearing that and be like, yeah, yo, sure. But in my experience, having invested in a bunch of companies and working with a lot of founders, there's such a dichotomy between how hard it is for companies to hire when they don't have a mission people really care about versus a mission that's really meaningful. So there's something so powerful there and so it's 100%, I could see how that works so well. And then the other things you mentioned, patients, personal connections between the hiring manager and the people they're hiring. And I see that on Twitter, a lot of PMs are just doing things, like basically it's like they're writing on a little startup on Twitter like Jeff Weinstein,

David Singleton (00:13:12):
Yeah, so,

Lenny (00:13:12):
Atlas.

David Singleton (00:13:13):
Jeff is the PM for our Atlas product, and he's a great example of someone who cares a lot about learning exactly how the world works. So I mean for instance, one of the things that that team and Jeff really has driven this himself have done recently is recognizing that when you're starting a new business in the US, one of the most frustrating steps is that you have to apply for this Employer Identification Number from the IRS. And it used to have an extremely long backlog and it's really hard. You can't start running your business until you have it.

(00:13:42):
And Jeff dug into the details, the team dug into the details and we're just like kept asking, does it have to be this way? Does it have to be this way? And eventually we work with the IRS to make it possible for us to issue those numbers much, much more quickly, like instantly as you sign up. And I think that's exactly a great example of how being curious, having this relentless passion to solve problems for users and then just keep plugging away at a problem delivers this great result and in a environment where you can learn a lot from each other.

Lenny (00:14:11):
I hope he got a big promotion for getting the IRS to do something that he needed. That's incredible. I'm going to ask, try to go one layer deeper on the hiring piece and then move on to a different topic, but,

David Singleton (00:14:11):
Sure.

Lenny (00:14:22):
What is just the interview process like? I don't know how involved you are with the product management hiring process, but just I'm curious what that is like, high level and engineering hiring process, however you can share.

David Singleton (00:14:32):
Yeah, there are a couple things that are very common across hiring for all roles at Stripe and in particular engineers and PMs. One of the things is we do have structured hiring loops. So we put everyone through a very consistent process, so very personal as we help folks figure out why they might want to be here. But then we have a consistent way of evaluating talent. And I think that's important because it means that you can, as an interviewer, as a hiring manager, you can actually really start to understand what is the broad spectrum of responses you might get here and what do I actually learn about individual candidates when I'm asking similar questions. The other thing that these loops have in common is nothing is a trick question. We try to put people into an environment which is as close to doing the actual work together as we possibly can.

(00:15:18):
So I mean for engineers for instance, we've got several different coding exercises that they do. They share their screen with the interviewer. It's actually kind of pair programming welcome to use Google to search for Stack Overflow to search for answers. We don't care. We just want to see the outcome. We're happy for you to ask your interviewer questions as you go along. And we've created these exercises that is close to real problems as we need to solve at Stripe as possible. The same is true on the PM side. One of the things, for instance we do with PMs is we have a written exercise, we've got obviously a variety of different problems and we find that very valuable for actually just seeing how does someone attack a real problem that they would be solving at work and will they want to do that in a way that is curious, digging into the details, collaborative with their interviewer and so forth. So that's the point. Structured loops that are consistent. And then questions that are as close to the real job as we possibly can.

Lenny (00:16:13):
And for the questions on the PM side, do you have them do it at home or do them do it in the office?

David Singleton (00:16:18):
It's a variety. Right now at Stripe, we're very much in a hybrid mode, so a lot of our interviews are still happening over Zoom, although we have plenty of great activity going on in our offices as well. The written exercises tend to be something that you do in your own time. We suggest a time bind so it's not an unreasonable demand in the rest of your life. And then the other exercises are with an interviewer on Zoom.

Lenny (00:16:40):
Okay. So speaking of product managers at Stripe, Stripe is kind of famous slash infamous for waiting a long time to hire your first product manager. From what I understand, it was like around the 200th employee and maybe five years in, which to me tells me that you're really good at building product minded engineers and or hiring and building a product minded engineering culture. How do you do that? How do you go about doing that? And then I'm also just curious what PMs ended up bringing to the table and how they kind of collaborate now.

David Singleton (00:17:06):
Yeah, so I mean at Stripe today, we have lots of product managers, lots of engineers, product management's an extremely valuable and important job family. I'll talk more about what folks do today. It is true that our original team, and I think we hire our first PM a little bit earlier than you said, but our original team was really an engineering team. However, they were extremely product minded. And I would honestly say that of all of the very early team that I've worked closely with and know well over time, every single one of them could also have been and essentially also was acting as a PM. If you think about the nature of the first Stripe product, and again today we solve problems for businesses from the very small to the very large across a whole range of financial infrastructure. But the initial product was very developer focused and we still have a developer focused at the core of many things that we do.

(00:17:56):
The best PMs for developer focused products I think are usually very technical. They're mostly former engineers themselves or maybe kind of current engineers still tinkering on the side, but bringing a lot of user insight and strategy to the problem. And every single early member of the team at Stripe had to act like that in order to work the way that we do and that we want to. So remember, again, that is to get to know our users very well and then bring those kind of personal insights into our product development loop. So I mean, in fact, the way we think about product development at Stripe, it really is to find the correct set of early users to kind of co-create the product with. So maybe the best example of that, or at least an example of that is Stripe billing. So it's our solution for subscriptions and invoicing.

(00:18:43):
And when we got to starting the Stripe billing product, we realized that there were a number of our existing users. These were companies like Figma and Slack. We were already using Stripe for payments, but had these subscriptions, business models, and we figured that there were going to be many more of these kind of companies into the future, and we could see that they were really kind of pushing the boundaries of what was possible here. So we decided to co-create the product with them. The early team working on billing got a bunch of those companies included Slack and Figma, but a bunch more as well, got to know them. But the individuals who were operating those systems at those companies personally understood exactly what their challenges and hopes and dreams for the future were, and then brought them into a kind of shared product development loop.

(00:19:28):
So we had shared Slack channels, we'd actually show them product on a very regular basis, get their feedback on it. And only when that original kind of Alpha group was super, super happy with the product did we then think it might be ready to go to a broader audience. So that is just how we build product at Stripe. And that means that every engineer building product at Stripe really has many of the kind of attributes and will exercise many of the attributes that you'll often find in PMs in other companies.

(00:19:57):
Now, that doesn't mean that there isn't a really important job for PMs to do here as well. So something else that I think is worth knowing about Stripe and is somewhat unique is building products is also a much more kind of team sport at Stripe across functions. So there are the obvious functions that most companies have, engineers, engineering managers, product managers, designers, and those folks all get involved throughout the entire lifecycle of product development at Stripe. But also, if you think about the nature of our products, it turns out that a lot of our products are about abstracting over what the financial system does at large.

(00:20:31):
So sometimes there's a capability in a certain country and there's a different one in another country, and we want to make it all work consistently. So our financial partnerships matter. So sometimes folks from our partnerships team are part of the kind of early development phase of a product. Similarly, when you think about product legal and many of the other functions around risk and compliance and so forth, we actually need their creative thinking in order to build the right stuff for our users. So the point is it's a way more cross-functionally collaborative process than I've seen in a lot of other companies. And PMs play just this absolute linchpin role across a lot of that. So PMs are very frequently the ones that are providing the kind of look motion to bring all of that partnership together. They're very frequently the folks that are synthesizing what we're learning from our users.

(00:21:19):
Not everyone is talking to users across all those job families, but the PM is probably the person talking to folks the very most and probably the one who's synthesizing the very best. They often and usually also bring a lot of the product strategy, okay, this is what we're doing today, but what does it ladder up to and therefore how do we make the right choices to make sure that we're taking the right longer term path. And so it's a super important and valuable role. And I mean, you've mentioned a couple of great ones on the call here already, but I think that the PMs at Stripe embodying a lot of the culture I talked about in our operating principles just contributed a tremendous amount to what we get done.

Lenny (00:21:56):
Perfect segue to where I was going to go with the next question, which is, one of your operating principles is to be meticulous with your craft. And I know this is something that you focus on a lot. What I'm curious about is that sounds great. Everyone would love for that to be a focus of theirs and a core value in the way they operate. But there's always this trade off of we just got to ship stuff. How do we wait until it's perfect? So what I want to ask is just how do you operationalize this principle, first of all? And then I'm going to have a few follow up questions.

David Singleton (00:22:25):
Yeah, great question. Before I talk about this one operating principle, let me just set a little bit of context of,

Lenny (00:22:30):
Yeah.

David Singleton (00:22:30):
What are our operating principles at all. So at Stripe we have operating principles and they're kind of like corporate values, but they're not just values, they're much less abstract than that. So actually, we were just talking about the early Stripe team. I think one of the best things that they did, I mean they did a bunch of great stuff, finding early product market fit, but one of the most foresighted things that they did was to kind of take a little detour and think about what is it about how we've been working so far that we think has made us successful and is going to be important as we continue to scale. And we capture those as a set of operating principles so...

David Singleton (00:23:00):
Continue to scale and we capture those as a set of operating principles. So their behavior is distilled from the most effective Stripes and we really care about them. So we talk about our operating principles a lot internally. I'll often see individual Stripes kind of celebrating each other's work in terms of which operating principle is kind of best represented. We frame a lot of our feedback processes and so forth around them, although not exclusively. The very first operating principle we have by the way, is users first. So we've already on this call, touched a bunch on how we put our users at the center of understanding what we should be doing at all. And that idea that we've formed these deep personal relationships with our users to guide everything really comes from and is captured by that operating principle. We also have operating principles. They're kind of segmented into how we work, who we are, and then a bunch that leaders must execute.

(00:23:52):
So I mean another example of one of how we work ones is move with urgency and focus. We really believe that even though we're building infrastructure that will persist for decades, it is important that we solve the needs our users just have right now, relatively rapidly so that it actually makes sense, is delivering value for them. So anyway, there there's a range of them. You asked about being meticulous in our craft. So this is another highway work principle and it is very important at Stripe and you also call it Lenny, a challenge of being meticulous, which is, well, there's so much to get done. So where can I be meticulous? Because well, if you do it across everything, maybe a lot of progress would grind to a halt. Well first of all, let me tell a couple of stories.

(00:24:37):
So before I joined Stripe, I spent some time and it's a big part of deciding to join, playing with the product. And something that really delighted me was that when I started integrating the product, there were parts of the experience where I was stuck. So I made a mistake with how it integrated API. I was getting an error message back, but I wasn't stuck for very long because something that the team at Stripe had done was we made the error messages coming out of our API link to the piece of the docs that told you how to solve the problem.

Lenny (00:25:12):
Genius.

David Singleton (00:25:12):
And that is a really good example of being meticulous in the craft. So it's pretty uncommon, it's certainly very uncommon back then for companies to do this, like your error messages or your API, who's ever going to look at them? Well, turns out developers while they're building and if they're running into problems, they will look at them. It's actually a really high stakes moment because it's a time that matters. So that is an example of where we've been meticulous in the product.

(00:25:37):
And the way that we kind of figure out where to be meticulous, where to really sweat the details and go above and beyond is again, we try to be as user first as we possibly can. So we have a process that is widely used across product teams that even like folks building stuff internally for Stripes to use, which we call friction logging. The way this works is you need to put yourself in a particular user's shoes. It's actually important to have a very clear idea of who is the person I am kind of modeling the friction for right now.

(00:26:09):
So for instance, I might be integrating the Stripe billing API and I might put myself in the shoes of an engineer at, I don't know, let's say Atlassian, which is one of the world's largest SaaS platforms and using actively Stripe billing for automating all the revenue today, I might put myself in the mindset of that person. I might have met them recently and kind of understood a little bit better than otherwise doing this particular thing.

(00:26:35):
And then I will go through the process of actually using the product, starting off in the dashboard, hopping over to the particular page in the docs that I need to follow, starting to write code and so forth in order to do my integration and make really careful and meticulous notes of what the experience is. So stream of consciousness notes, but paying particular attention to the places where I ran into friction that I think that particular user mental modeling would find difficult. And then those are the places where we will tend to go and invest a tremendous amount in really thinking how could we solve this problem? And then putting a lot of attention into detail into making it right.

(00:27:16):
And by the way, the example I gave you on the error message is there's actually more code in the jobs that serve the Stripe API to handle those edge cases than in the actual main flow. And I think that's quite remarkable. Most people wouldn't do that, but it turns out not only was it something I was impressed with, but when I talk to Stripe users, this is very frequently something they tell me and delights them about the product. It's a reason that they can adopt it more quickly and it's a reason that they keep adopting other Stripe products because they know that it's going to be easier than doing anything else. So it really matters. So the point is like we are intentional about where the places where being particularly meticulous matters and then when we are, try to do it in quite a systematic way. It's great business as well.

(00:27:57):
So for instance, we actually just earlier today put a blog post up that explains we've been tuning both what we call our payment element, which is our kind of morph kind of batteries included UI for putting payment integrations directly on your website. You can style it to fit with the rest of your page, but it has a lot of powerful features. And we also have a set of hosted services called Stripe Checkout. And the point here is we've gone and scarred a whole bunch of checkout flows on the internet over the course of many years and we look out for all of the little broken edges and we've been working hard on these products to tune those and then not, we don't just stop there. We've also been really obsessing about what are the things that we can do in the flows that we've already built that will remove latency or remove a click or whatever.

(00:28:48):
And what we found, we've recently measured the difference between, so with a bunch of actual users who've migrated from a fairly vanilla integration where they built their own checkout flow to one of these surfaces to our payment element or to Stripe Checkout, it turns out that it increases the average user's revenue by 10.5%. And that's huge. So this is an industry where little changes that you might go about making or even big changes that you pour blood, sweat, and tears into will typically deliver uplifts in that you measure in basis points that's hundreds of a percentage point and this set of small changes compounding over time ladders up to 10.5%, it's huge. And the point is you only get there by knowing that this is a thing that might ultimately matter and being meticulous in every single step along the way and that it compounds to a dramatic impact in the end. So I think that that particular set of experiences is one where this operating principle has really mattered.

(00:29:49):
Thinking about those kind of flows is what led us to build Link, which is our product for making one click checkout available. And that has had a tremendous impact both on convenience for customers of our users and also on their conversion rate and so forth. So it really matters.

(00:30:07):
And then one final other area, if I may, I think Stripe is relatively well known for putting a lot of care and attention into our website, a lot of our marketing or product explanation pages. And I think for a business like ours, it's not immediately obvious that it makes a tremendous amount of sense to be super meticulous in building those experiences. But we are, and again, I think it really matters for us and for our users. So the way that we got into this mode was we recognized that we are building a lot of infrastructure.

(00:30:42):
So we build what we call our global payments and treasury network. It is literally our product infrastructure for moving money into Stripe, holding balances on behalf of our users, moving money out, all of the automation between moving money between different businesses and all of the kind of regulatory stuff we have to handle, all handle in this big payment engine. But as a user, it's very hard for you to come in and inspect that and say, well, is it good? I mean hopefully you can go and talk to a bunch of other Stripe users, but it's very hard to know from the outside. So if we put a lot of care for detail and attention into the experiences that we use to explain the value and the power of that, it actually helps our users understand exactly how it is that we are trying to operate for them.

(00:31:24):
And that's where all the meticulousness that we put into our site have come from. There are lots of features like we have a spinning globe on our page that shows you what payment methods you can use in different countries and we have this kind of big animated wave on our homepage. And in general, Stripe is kind of known for these great internet moments when we launched products. And so we did it because we wanted our users to be able to see the care and attention that we were taking. It's turned like to have this wonderful kind of side benefit to some extent because those experiences tend to get shared a lot on Twitter and LinkedIn and elsewhere because they're worth looking at just because they're beautiful and they often push the web platform forward. And that then means that folks are likely, folks who themselves want to push internet business forward, are likely to know about Stripe and know about our capabilities.

(00:32:11):
So meticulousness plays out with impact in so many different ways at Stripe and I enjoy working that way in many different areas.

Lenny (00:32:22):
I have a few follow up questions along those lines, but before we do that I want to double click on this friction logging process.

David Singleton (00:32:28):
Sure.

Lenny (00:32:28):
Just understand how you actually do that. So maybe two questions there. Is this a regular task people have on their plate say or is executives or just PMs in general? And is there a template that you share just like you talked about who we are, what company are you working for, what problem are you trying to solve? How do you actually kind of tactically operationalize that?

David Singleton (00:32:50):
Yeah, great question. So it's a practice that is quite valuable generically. There are many places where you can apply friction logging in order to really shine a light on what is the most effective place to invest time and effort.

(00:33:04):
So we use the practice across lots of different functions and in lots of different ways at Stripe, but it is the case that almost every product team has someone, it's often the PM, sometimes it's the engineering manager who has a regular repeating loop of going through the end-to-end flow of the product and writing a friction log. For years and years, I have gone through the process of onboarding [inaudible 00:33:28] user to Stripe once a month, writing a friction log and then tagging in the right people across the company that might need to take action on some of the things that we're observing.

(00:33:37):
And one of the reasons that that kind of process of taking a big step back is useful is at this stage we have many people, we have thousands of engineers who are working in parallel. And while everyone cares a lot about being meticulous, paying attention to detail, getting the details can have to end up with experiences that diverge and going through this process of looking at it all together on a regular rhythm with friction logging really helps us maintain a cohesive whole while we all operate in parallel. And so therefore senior leaders, executives, I guess of our larger areas will often do this as a practice themselves in order to make sure that everything that they're responsible for is coming together well. So it happens kind of recursively at different layers.

(00:34:20):
To your question about is there a template, so relatively simple process. So yes, there is a template and in fact there's a Stripe talk dev article that maybe we can put into the show notes that has the template, but it literally is say what you want to do, be very explicit about the user that you are trying to have a mental model for because that helps you make the right choices as you go through the flow. And then really just keep a very clear stream of consciousness log of what you're finding as you build.

(00:34:46):
By the way, also really important, praise the stuff that's good. So I'll often send these docs around to a lot of folks inside of the company. It's a great opportunity to recognize great work done. So if I ran into that error message that links to the documentation, that's a great example where I'd be like, this is awesome. Nice work.

Lenny (00:35:02):
Being a PM that has received emails from the CEOs of companies with all the problems they ran into and they're trying to book, it's often like, oh God, I have so many goals I got to hit and I have this timeline, I have these things I'm working on. What is the culture like slash how do you give teams space to do these things that are just like, we're just going to make the experience better? How do you actually do that so that PMs aren't stressed out when they get these things?

David Singleton (00:35:26):
It starts with our operating principles. So because we have operating principles of users first and being meticulous in our craft, we actually tend, all of our ways of building plans tend to be wired quite well around this idea that we're going to reserve enough time to really make the experience good. Maybe the most pronounced version of that is not even the issues we identify in friction logs. Maybe in a bit we can talk about how we invest in reliability and so forth, but things go wrong.

(00:35:54):
And one of the things that's very important to me is that we are a learning organization. We need to understand why they went wrong and then take action to stop the same thing going wrong in future. And so that means that we identify instant remediations, that's what we call those and we prioritize those carefully and most of them, the ones that matter actually get prioritized before other work on the roadmap, which means that as a PM when you're building your roadmap and your plans, you do have to think about, well approximately how much bandwidth do I need to reserve in this area in order to address and polish stuff that might come up through friction logging and also to take care of those kind of operational things as well?

(00:36:30):
It varies by team and varies by stage of product. So there is no Stripe kind of like we will reserve 50% of our time to do this stuff. That wouldn't make any sense. But we do encourage and ask every team to think hard about how much should they be setting aside for those kind of activities. Does that make sense?

Lenny (00:36:47):
Absolutely. I was going to ask you if there's a percentage and basically you trust the teams to set aside the right amount of time.

David Singleton (00:36:52):
That's right.

Lenny (00:36:53):
Awesome. Okay, so along the same lines, I actually asked Shreyas Doshi what I should ask you.

David Singleton (00:37:00):
Oh cool.

Lenny (00:37:01):
You had no idea I was going to do this. And what he said is I should ask you how you did UX reviews pre shipping right after you joined Stripe and you just said you were very good at this. And so what is that like and how should people learn from your experience?

David Singleton (00:37:20):
The way that I did UX reviews very early on in my time at Stripe and the way that every group at Stripe does these reviews is employing some of the techniques we talked about already. So that act of friction logging, it's very often done asynchronously. So someone will sit down and reserve an afternoon and go through the product and make meticulous notes and that's super useful.

(00:37:40):
We also find it very valuable to go through that process together. So we will bring together both the team that built the product that we're looking at, but also a lot of their cross-functional partners. So things like the support folks that are going to be handling or are building the process to handle questions from users about it. Executives in the org that they're a part of to do these walkthroughs where we're taking exactly the same approach as I described with friction logging so imagining we're a particular user and experiencing the product together. And then just discussing very openly actually the way that we do this today is we have a log of issues that we want to talk about that anyone can type into while the PM usually is walking us through the flow. And then we'll get together at the end and actually talk about each issue and does this need to be addressed? What do we really think about it? So that that's the approach both that I took early on and that we take in at general at scale today.

(00:38:36):
There's a lot of benefit to doing this together. So someone once described this to me as if you were a chef, you're going to taste the soup and you're going to talk to your kitchen staff about what went into the soup when it was good and wasn't so good. If you run a movie studio, you're going to sit down and watch a lot of movies together. And so actually kind of looking at product together I find extremely energizing and also really valuable in actually teaching some of the kind of bar for craft and values around how we want the product to interoperate for our users at scale across the company.

(00:39:10):
And building on that, there's something that we do occasionally and I've done occasionally a Stripe called Walk the Store where we'll actually do that process of looking at the product together with the whole company. So we have a weekly meeting called Friday Fireside where you don't have to attend, but the majority of the company does attend and we've done a few series where we'll actually go through some really, really interesting critical product flows together and talk about how this is reflecting various priorities that we have and shifts that we're trying to make, but in particular with the user experience and a particular user at the core. And that turns out to have a tremendous amount of benefit and value in helping just everyone have a shared language, we're talking about things and get on the same page about everything.

(00:39:58):
So yeah, those are some of the techniques that Shreyas might have been thinking of.

Lenny (00:40:02):
It's amazing how many directions you all come at to create this high quality end product walking the store, friction logging these entire company meetings, looking at the product, UX reviews, this is how it's possible to build something so high quality. It's not just we have this value and we're going to be building great stuff. It's like you have to come at it from so many places.

David Singleton (00:40:24):
Yeah, that's an interesting observation. I think almost anything that you talk about is a value. I mean, being a value matters, but you need to have a practice behind that. That means that the value becomes real for everyone. So we very frequently find that for any product development team, so long as they identify the right metrics that actually represent the experience that they want to deliver for their users and then get together frequently like predictably to look at how the team is doing against those metrics. But then everything else just happens naturally because you understand what you're trying to move and every little micro decision you're making within your own time prioritization and then in terms of the actual work you're doing will ladder up to that. And so why do I say that? It is like you have to have the predictable and regular thing that ladders up to the value you're trying to deliver in order to make it happen.

Lenny (00:41:17):
Coming back to the UX review, just a question there. Presenting to the CTOs often very stressful in a review like that. What advice would you give PMs and designers and just leads of a team for how to prepare for a meeting like that, whether it's Stripe or anywhere?

David Singleton (00:41:33):
I personally try to be as friendly and unscary as possible, but I know that no matter how much I do that, these can't be high stakes meetings. At Stripe, and I think it's probably goes for most companies, but at Stripe, the main answer here is put your user's hat on and if you understand your user well and what they're seeking to get out of the experience and anchor any questions you get asked or wobbles you may feel of like, oh, that was an out of the blue question back to well here's, remember what we're trying to do for our users, that usually makes any meeting like that go really well. And so that would be my main piece of advice.

(00:42:12):
So I mean a risk that exists in any company as you get to run a bigger team or whatever is that individual contributors, individuals will have a very small amount of time with you in general. So there's always a risk that you might make a kind of fairly unimportant remark and it will be taken out of context to be something very important. So I personally also try very hard to anchor feedback I'm giving in what's the user experience we're trying to deliver? Does this actually matter? Recognizing that that is a risk and yeah, it definitely takes constant practice.

Lenny (00:42:51):
You've touched on a couple of these things, but just if someone's trying to get better at building product, either a PM, designer, engineer, what kind of advice do you often give for helping people just build better product?

David Singleton (00:43:03):
Almost always goes back to things we've already talked about here. So remember at the very top I talked about iterating very closely with users? If you have a mechanism to listen to users, get something in their hands quite quickly and then get their feedback on it to run it back through a feedback loop, you're very unlikely to go wrong. Especially if you put a lot of thought into these being the right users whose needs you want to focus on because they ladder up to your strategy. It's actually very hard to go wrong if you have that feedback loop working really well.

(00:43:34):
So if you don't have that feedback loop, and actually it's remarkable as I talk to folks across the industry and so forth, it's remarkable how frequently that feedback loop doesn't exist in product development cycles. So if you don't have that, go figure out how to create it and if you do have it, but you can't get something into user's hands very rapidly from you having the idea that this might matter to getting their feedback on it, figure out how to make that go faster as well. And at Stripe, we focus a lot on all of our developer tooling and infrastructure on making it possible for changes to get delivered continuously to production so we can get them in front of users very rapidly and that's really important.

Lenny (00:44:10):
This episode is brought to you by Braintrust, where the world's most innovative companies go to find talent fast so that they can innovate faster. Let's be honest, it's a lot of work to build a company and if you want to stay ahead of the game, you need to be able to hire the right talent quickly and confidently. Braintrust is the first decentralized talent network where you can find, hire and manage high quality contractors in engineering, design and product for a fraction of the cost of agencies.

(00:44:37):
Braintrust charges a flat rate of only 10%, unlike agency fees of up to 70% so you can make your budget go four times further. Plus they're the only network that takes 0% of what the talent makes so they're able to attract and retain the world's best tech talent. Take it from DoorDash, Airbnb, Plaid, and hundreds of other high growth startups that have shaved their hiring process for months to weeks at less than a quarter of the cost by hiring through Braintrust network of 20,000 high quality vetted candidates ready to work.

(00:45:07):
Whether you're looking to fill in gaps, upskill your staff, or build a team for that dream project that finally got funded, contact Braintrust and you'll get matched with three candidates in just 48 hours. Visit usebraintrusts.com/lenny or find them in my show notes for today's episode. That's usebraintrust.com/lenny for when you need talent yesterday.

(00:45:29):
Something that I've heard about you is that you get into the weeds, you get really deep as a CTO of a company at the scale of Stripe and I came across this term engineerications, which I think connects to this. Can you talk about that and how you think about just getting in the weeds?

David Singleton (00:45:44):
First of all, in terms of how much getting in the weeds matters. At Stripe, we find that it's very important for engineering managers in particular, but really all managers to really have a very detailed understanding of whether their teams are kind of on the right track and where they're getting stuck in order to make sure that we make the most progress in unit time for our.

David Singleton (00:46:00):
We're getting stuck in order to make sure that we make the most progress in unit time for our users. So we find that, again, the nature of the problems we're solving, really reward domain expertise, like assimilating a deep understanding. And we ask all of our managers to be kind of the editors in chief of their teams plans. And I think the only way to do that is to get the right loop for yourself to understand what is actually going on the ground. Now, it would be really damaging if I was only doing work at the IC engineering level every day. That doesn't ladder up to someone who's able to help guide the team or whatever. So it's important to just judiciously but done on the right cadence. I think it's very, very valuable. So engineer occasion is something that I personally do. So it's obviously a port man of engineer and vacation, but it's not a vacation.

(00:46:47):
The way we get to the name of the tower, at least the way I think about it is what you do on engineer occasion is I'll clear, other people track do this as well. I'll clear several days in a road, three or four days actually join a team, pick up a small task, hopefully a small feature that we can get all the way from start to finish in production and do that going through the exact experience the team has. So you get to understand the developer tools, the build infrastructure, how you get stuff reviewed, how good is the documentation, how long did I have to wait in order to actually see my thing live in order to start that feedback loop that I talked about with users. So you're actually going and joining a team and doing some work.

(00:47:26):
While one does that, it's really valuable and important to keep a friction log because then what you want to do is write up the experience both as an aid memoir for yourself because it then helps you go and for all of the next year's worth of conversations I might be involved in around making trade offs and helping set priorities, that context really helps. So I actually reread these reports periodically and it's also really valuable to actually share them work with the team, which then demonstrates, well I understand what it's actually like and here's how we're going to make sure that we're carrying that information through prioritization. So that's what you do. The name is, it's the often the hardest thing about these is finding the time to clear your calendar for that many days. So the reason I think about it is a vacation is of course people go on vacation.

(00:48:12):
By the way, I work very hard to use all my vacation days every year. I think that taking a break and recharging your creative juices is valuable. So the point is when you're on vacation, the world goes on and it's all fine. So I treat it like I'll decline every meeting in order to clear my schedule and have a maker schedule in order to do that. And so I've done this many times at Stripe. I advise engineering managers at Stripe that they should do an engineer occasion sometime in their first quarter to six months at the company. It gives you a tremendous amount of context for what your teams are actually experiencing and then for folks who do it once a year on an ongoing basis and it provides a tremendous amount of context.

Lenny (00:48:50):
That is insane. I've never heard of that process. How do you stay knowledgeable and up to date on the infrastructure and the code that you have to code and all of a sudden things move so fast?

David Singleton (00:49:00):
The process is literally to help you do that. I guess maybe something I left out in explaining it is we'll often identify a buddy on the team who's going to help you through. So for what it's worth at Stripe, we write a lot of code in Ruby, we write a lot of code in other just Java type script as well. But our kind of core infrastructure is mostly implemented, core product infrastructure mostly implemented in Ruby. When I started I had never written a line of Ruby in my life and I knew I wanted to do this thing and actually done something like it before joining and I was really scared. How much credibility might I lose if I show up and I can't write a line of Ruby. But my first buddy was a guy called Ajhja who's still at Stripe doing great stuff and he helped me learn Ruby during these three days and they [inaudible 00:49:48] me a little bit, but ultimately everyone really appreciated that I've done it.

Lenny (00:49:52):
Imagine being the engineer has to review your PR.

David Singleton (00:49:55):
I tell them this is an important part of the process. Please don't treat me any different to anyone else. And obviously to make this work well you have to set the expectation that you're not going to take me action if something isn't exactly the way you want it to be. It is a moral kind of longitudinal process.

Lenny (00:50:11):
Is there something that you found in this process that comes to mind that was really surprising or interesting or just kind of lasting in the past set of couple years?

David Singleton (00:50:19):
One of the most interesting things that I think I've run into is there are a lot of places that as we scale, we know that it makes a lot of sense to invest in automation and there were a bunch of places in our development process where while we've done that, we were working hard to help each other out and actually saying, hey, please come talk to this other team if you want to use this thing. And if you're working for instance, a different time zone from someone else, it's often the case that actually it would be much better just to document it well and automate it and then maybe make the consultation available. And so running into those kind of pieces of friction and then having a good conversation about it has really helped. But one good thing about Stripe I think is that kind of change doesn't depend on me doing anything.

(00:51:02):
So we really care about making Stripe a place where engineers can do some of the best work of their careers and that means being enabled with good tools and good developer productivity. So we invest a lot in developer productivity. We have a team who work on our dev tools and they actually run exactly the same product development process that I just described for our external users internally. So understand your users really well. Talk to them a lot, as so for instance, we do a monthly survey. We operate in enough scale where we can ping enough people once a month that we get a statistically significant sample of the entire organization without having to get everyone to respond. Every individual respond once every six months. And we ask very directly, what's the experience you're having? And then we use that to prioritize the roadmap of our developer productivity team. We also measure everything so we know where people are getting stuck and when we compare both the kind of free responses and the data, it helps us invest in the best places to make everyone else more productive.

Lenny (00:52:03):
Okay, that's exactly where I was hoping to go next. And let me set this question up. So I saw a tweet of yours recently where I have some notes here I'm going to read that you deploy changes to your core, API 16.4 times a day on average. Your uptime has been 99.999% and one in 10 people in the world have transacted with a business powered by Stripe at this point. And so my question is just what does it take to achieve something like this, especially in terms of tooling and culture and everything else you're just talking about?

David Singleton (00:52:33):
Well I think it's worth saying at Stripe we are trying to do something I think relatively unique, which is what we power for the businesses to build on Stripe our users, it's really business critical to them. We're literally talking about money coming into your business to help you run your operations or make it even possible for you to run your operations and maybe pay your employees and so forth. All the revenue automation that we do around billing subscriptions, our financial automation products, helping you close your books, this stuff matters. You cannot get it wrong. And we also operate, Stripe today, we move as much money as all of e-commerce was when Stripe got started. So we operate very significant scale and so business critical significant scale, we just have a tremendous duty to our users to get this right and be extremely reliable and available for them.

(00:53:23):
So we do think about that a lot. Now there's one way to be very reliable, which is to try to change things as infrequently as possible. Never change anything than you have many fewer opportunities for things to break. But we don't take that approach. The needs of our users are evolving so rapidly, the number of ways that we want to serve them and can serve them is evolving rapidly enough that it matters a lot that we can operate in a kind of constantly changing environment. Hopefully I've explained why that matters like that type feedback because it's only possible if you can actually get something in their hands. So we choose to design the way we work to hold those two things true at the same time and it does take a lot of care and attention and it takes a lot of systems. So maybe just kind of build this up.

(00:54:12):
First of all, there's a lot in our development process and the ways that we take changes into our product that makes this possible. One of those is we really care a lot about having really good test suites. So we believe in automated testing. We don't have manual testers because manual testers couldn't possibly cover the vast array of API endpoint and configurations that we offer but automated test can. So we work hard to have a lot of automated test coverage and then every single change that an engineer produces gets run through this battery of tests before it can even possibly go towards production. And then we work very hard as changes end up in production to put them through increasingly realistic and then more broadly exposed environments. So we have a bunch of staging environments where we'll send a battery of more realistic end-to-end tests. Then finally when something actually goes to production, it starts at very small percentage of the traffic and then wraps up to the hole.

(00:55:10):
So we can detect problems before they become huge problems. There's a number of things that we had to do to make that all possible. So for instance, every change that Strip engineer submits [inaudible 00:55:23] test, it actually ends up in production automatically over the course of the next 45 minutes or so. And I don't think there are a lot of financial services companies, at least not until maybe the last few years that have operated that way. And so that takes a certain mind shift. You actually have to assume that that's going to happen and put the right systems and processes in place. And then the other thing that's important is to recognize that we have to obsess about getting very systematically good at addressing anything that can go wrong. So I mentioned earlier it's really important to me that we are a continuously learning organization.

(00:55:59):
And I mean something else that matters of course is things will go wrong. Sometimes there is a downstream partner where something breaks, other times there is a particular kind of network outage side of our control or whatever. So things will go wrong. So it's important that we have the right systems in place that minimize the damage that any individual thing going wrong can cause. And we work hard on that. We have redundant systems in a bunch of places. We think hard about how something that breaks for one user wouldn't kind of carry over into other users and then we actually very actively work hard to put things right when they are wrong. So that's called instant response at most companies including Stripe. I actually think Stripe is very, very good at instant response. We've got very good tools for both declaring incidents and then pulling the right people together to put them right.

(00:56:45):
But we don't stop there. We really obsess about reviewing them carefully and identifying not only what would've stopped this thing happening, but how could we prevent this whole class of issues in the future. And as I said earlier, we prioritize working on that stuff ahead of anything else on the roadmap that's because of remember what it is we're trying to do, how important it is and how if we don't do that well, we can't move quickly for our users. So that's how we do it.

(00:57:09):
By the way, I don't want to come across here and sound like we've got it all figured out. Of course all of this is always entirely influx. We're always anxious to figure out how we can make it go better. For instance, in recent years we realize that we could get a lot of benefit from what we call chaos testing. That's like injecting errors and making sure that the systems respond in such a way that it doesn't cause any impact on users. So it's constantly evolving and we really enjoy learning from other companies and learning from our users as well. But it's something we care about and think very rigorously and systematically alone.

Lenny (00:57:40):
Did you say that it takes only 45 minutes from pushing code to it going into production?

David Singleton (00:57:45):
Typically yes. So that battery of tests that I described, that gets run on every change, that gets run in parallel to when you send it for review by another human. So it's run once, typically takes about 15 minutes and then once the changes merged into our code base, we run that same test suite one more time. So another 15 minutes then typically takes about 30 minutes for the systems to automatically deployed in production. That's how we run and think about establishing that tight feedback loop with users, that means you can get feedback from a user in the morning, you can figure out how to address it and you can actually put something back in their hands by the end of the day. And that loop running inside of 24 hours I think is pretty important.

Lenny (00:58:26):
That's incredible. I remember times that Airbnb where took hours for tests to finish because there's a lot of them and they fix that over time. But I'm used to more on that scale.

David Singleton (00:58:37):
It takes constant effort to hold. Those numbers by the way are important. Those are about the right numbers I think for a company operating our kind of scale. Of course as you add more stuff, you add more tests. So we've had to work on, we had to invent mechanisms to make it run more in parallel, we now have a thing called selective test execution where we figure out for not the battery that runs before it goes into production that we run everything and just run it in more machines to make it parallelize. But for the changes or the tests that we run for individual changes, we actually have systems that figure out, well which tests are the ones that might be material for this particular thing? And that's been a real source of innovation. In fact, our distributed change and test environment at Stripe is the biggest distributed system that we actually run. And so running that requires just as much energy and effort and rigor and craft as everything else.

Lenny (00:59:29):
What are some of the things you've done that have had the most impact on developer productivity?

David Singleton (00:59:34):
We've touched on a couple of these already. That auto deploy mechanism definitely had a very significant individual impact. So before we introduced that, sometime within the last five years each deployed to production required an engineer to actually babysit it, to watch it as it, make sure all the charts look good. And it was a bit of kind of game of roulette because you always wish that your change would get bundled in with someone else's so that they were paying attention to it for you. So literally being able to be fingers on keyboard on something else while your change is going live and it's going to automatically monitored, that was a big improvement in our productivity. Also, very small things. This is just like optimizing checkout, very small changes really compounded in a big way. So for instance, by eight months ago we made it possible, we use a tool for code review.

(01:00:24):
It's quite popular, it's GitHub enterprise, but we've built a bunch of our own experiences and controls around that and we have a little tick box that you can tick on your pool request. That's what you call an individual change that an engineer produces that is auto merge, which means once the reviewer says this is good, I don't need to come back and look at it again, the system should just take over and that just cuts out one whole kind of human distraction step and that laddered up to a big change in productivity as well. So these very small changes can if you're deliberate with them, ladder up to a big impact.

Lenny (01:00:55):
I'm going to go in a different direction now. AI very hot right now. Has AI impacted the way you all build product yet? And if not, where do you think it starts to go in the next few years?

David Singleton (01:01:06):
Yeah, we're very excited about AI. Now to just take one step back, Stripe has been using machine learning and advanced machine learning techniques at the heart of our products since the very early days. Radar is our solutions for payment fraud and it has used, I mean this is the very core of our products and has used machine learning since we introduced it. We also, if you think about the nature of Stripe, we operate in an environment where we have to do a lot of work to kind of catch bad actors in the system, fraudsters or fraudulent businesses. So we've been employing a lot of machine learning techniques there again for years and we couldn't operate the company without them. So the difference between ML and AI, I think when we think about AI today we're mostly talking about the applications of large language models, but those are really based on this new technology called Transformers.

(01:01:55):
It was a paper that came out of Google a while back about four years ago, five years ago. And we put transformer technology into those systems at some point more than a year ago. And it's proved to have a very profound impact on our ability to solve those problems for our users, which is great. But we are also excited about the applications of large language models. I mean there's really two dimensions to this. Number one, we feel privileged to be able to help serve and power a lot of businesses getting started in this space. One big difference between AI startups and others is it's actually quite expensive to operate an AI startup in terms of the compute resources. Like running this stuff in these GPU machines is quite expensive. So typically these companies need to have a monetization model from day one. And I'm really excited to say most of the AI on these is running on Stripe and we're working very hard to make sure we serve all their needs.

(01:02:51):
Open AI, for instance, using us for monetizing chat GPT plus and all their other products. But they don't just stop there. We're actually helping power all of their subscriptions and revenue tracking and financial operations around the business. And the point about that is we've been putting very large engineering teams on this stuff for years and that means anyone who wants to build a reconciliation product and a subscriptions business model, if you want to do that yourself, you have to put big engineering teams on them. But if you can use Stripe instead, you can actually focus those really precious engineering resources on keeping up with the rate of breakneck innovation in this space. So we're excited about that, but we're also really excited about the applications of these AI techniques on our own ability to serve our users better. And so for instance, at sessions we'll be talking about a few of these.

(01:03:44):
We started working with OpenAI when they had the beta. It was a kind of private beta of GPT four available at the beginning of this year. The first thing we thought of was we've got a lot of documentation on Stripe and we put a lot of care attention into making it good. But if you want to achieve something with your Stripe integration, you're typically going to spend quite a lot of time reading docs and kind of synthesizing them as an end user. We realized we can have GPT four read all of our docs, store them as embeddings and then answer questions for developers. And so we now have that available in kind of early stage release inside of our documentation. It's turning out to be pretty valuable. We've also been able to apply these techniques to other areas of our products. So something that we're going to show an early version of IT sessions is we have a really powerful product as part of our revenue and financial automation suite, which we call Sigma.

(01:04:36):
It allows you to write sequel queries across all of your Stripe data so you can interrogate your Stripe data to understand your business and really fine grain detail. Which country has the fastest growing sales, which segment in which country has particular attributes to it? Very powerful product, but it's one that is potentially challenging for non-developers to adopt. You do have to know how to write sequel queries unless you just use the ones in the menu in order to get the full value out of the product. Well it turns out with large language models, we can apply this technology where you can ask questions in natural language and our engine will actually write the sequel query for you. And we've had to do a lot of work to kind of tune that to make sure that it's reliable and understandable and it's going really well. And we also see great applications in actually applying these technologies to make us more efficient internally, answer users questions faster, help each other out more quickly. And so we're doing those things as well. One concrete thing that we did, which I'm pretty excited about is not long after we saw chat GPT come out, we realized it would be really awesome if we could apply that to many use cases inside of Stripe. But as you can imagine, a lot of the data that we are dealing with on a daily basis is very sensitive to our business, to our users and we care a lot and we have a lot of governance around this, but we wanted to make that technology bill. We couldn't say, Hey Stripes, go and use chat GPT. So we stood up an integration to GPT four and an internal UI to use models like that. But here's the thing that I want to kind of relate to all of your viewers. We find that we built presets into that.

(01:06:12):
So when you work with large language models, you want to write a prompt that then helps get the model into a state where it's going to be able to solve the particular problem at hand. And we find that writing prompts is something that's accessible to folks across lots of different job families, not just engineers. Folks in our marketing team, folks in our user support team have been able to use this as well. But you can put a lot of care and attention to getting a prompt that works really well and we not make it possible for those to be shared across the company. So I can grab the preset to help me write a blog post with the right kind of tone and I find it extremely valuable in helping me and many other people across the company. So I think there's a lot of innovation in high companies serve their users and operate is possible right now and we are working hard to employ all of that on behalf of our users.

Lenny (01:07:03):
What about as engineers? Are pro co-pilot, is there some along those lines that you find useful weary of? How do you think about that?

David Singleton (01:07:12):
We're excited about co-pilot. We've made co-pilot available to our engineers internally. We ran a fairly rigorous trial to make sure that we felt good about its actual impact on our ability to write code and the code it was actually generating and find that it was very effective for us. Both in productivity but also just in helping our engineers feel like they could direct their energy towards some of the bigger problems. How should this stuff fit together rather than some of the micro problems. So because we had such great feedback on that, we've made it available very broadly internally and we'll be very excited to see where that space develops over time.

Lenny (01:07:56):
Do you have a sense of the productivity gain that say imagine you have a lot of 10X engineers, the gains that an amazing engineer gets out of a co-pilot versus a newer engineer?

David Singleton (01:08:07):
It's honestly too early to tell because we've only recently made it available at scale. What we're typically seeing is that the kind of tasks that it accelerates are, remember I mentioned how much energy we put into having comprehensive test suites. It's actually using co-pilot to generate your test cases, turns out to be extremely valuable. There's a reasonable amount of boiler plate that is kind of like repeated code and concepts that goes into writing good tests. But you also have to reason very carefully about is this actually testing is exactly what I want? So co-pilot takes a lot of that boiler plate generation out of the way. So you're actually thinking about the stuff that really matters. And I think that is going to have a profound impact on quality of code that we write as well. But it's a little too early to say, because we literally just folded out what kind of actual measurable impact is having.

Lenny (01:08:54):
I was talking to an engineer and he's just like, I like the active writing code and it makes me sad that this is doing this for me. So he turns it off.

Lenny (01:09:00):
This is doing this for me, so he turns it off. I think over time people will be like, "Eh, that's true. I never really enjoyed this part of it."

David Singleton (01:09:07):
Yeah, I'll speak from personal experience. I love writing code. I really love writing code. It's pretty much what I do for fun. I also love writing code with Copilot, because as I said, it means that I can focus on the parts that really matter. I think that's been a fairly consistent experience across Stripe as well.

Lenny (01:09:24):
Awesome. You run a massive engineering team. I don't know if you shared the numbers of engineers, but I know there are many. What are, and this is a broad question, just what are some lessons you've learned about managing people and/or managing engineers, whichever direction you want to go?

David Singleton (01:09:41):
Wow, big question. There are so many different directions we could take that. I'll share a few observations. They don't necessarily all have a particular theme to them. I think as I've been responsible for bigger and bigger teams over time, one of the things that just I repeatedly learn is I personally will not be involved in really any of the decisions that matter and happen. There are thousands of decisions that an organization of any skill is making every single day, every individual engineer or PM is making hundreds of small decisions and some big ones every day that affect the kind of general trajectory.

(01:10:17):
The most important thing is to really focus on hiring the right people, and that means hiring people that you can trust with a tremendous amount of autonomy. If I try to get involved in lots of decisions, everything will grind to a halt. How do you do that? It is important, obviously, to be rigorous. We've described already what our hiring process is. I really lean into getting to know folks in very, very well as we're hiring them. By the way, something I didn't mention earlier that is I think important here is we pay a lot of attention at Stripe during the hiring process to references.

(01:10:49):
This is typically later in the process, but if you put someone through an interview process, you've probably spent what, eight hours total with them? If you talk to people that actually have worked with them before, you're probably benefiting from thousands of hours of direct experience. We take this very seriously, and we try to ask smart questions that will help get real signal out of that. I certainly find when it comes to hiring folks that have then gone on to really make a transformative impact, that references are often the time that you get the best conviction on the hire or not.

(01:11:22):
Hire the right people, and then you have to trust them. Now, trust is interesting. Is actually quite challenging to trust people that you've just hired, right? Well, you've got no stake really on you yet. What I find is you do actually just have to be generous in giving trust and assuming trust by default at the beginning. Then you do need to hold people accountable enough that they are proving that they can handle that trust. Sometimes, that means hiring someone who you think quite plausibly can end up in a very big role into a smaller role to begin with. Other times, you just have the big role that you need to fill, in which case, it's important to be quite conscious about really trusting and delegating to them with a lot of support.

(01:12:02):
I'm always working hard to delegate sometimes a little bit more than I'm comfortable with, because that's the only way to really operate at significant scale. I think something else, and sorry, this is really a smorgasboard is what a lot of differences.

Lenny (01:12:17):
Perfect.

David Singleton (01:12:18):
Something else I've realized as the organizations I work with and been responsible for have grown is that you have to be extremely conscious about managing your own time. There are hundreds or thousands of people who, quite legitimately, might want to get some time with you. If you just let the places that you spend your time and energy be controlled by the stuff that comes into your inbox, or the stuff that gets put on your calendar, that's going to be random. It's quite likely that that's not laddering up to the biggest impact. I personally have been running a loop for, I don't know, maybe 10 years, where on Sunday evenings, and usually, well, it usually starts on Sunday afternoons, I read a lot of what happened last week.

(01:12:59):
Then on Sunday evenings, I actually write a list for myself of, you asked me a question at this podcast, which is like, what would be great success for this podcast from your perspective?

(01:13:08):
I basically think about that for my week every Sunday night. I make a list of if we got these things done this week, that is a good week, but obviously, we need to be dynamic. Things will surprise you through the week. Honestly, then, that drives a lot of just where I decide to spend my time. I try to encourage everyone to think that way throughout the organization. I think it does ladder up to more impact over time. I think the final thing I'll say here is I mentioned how important operating principles are to the culture. I think for any manager and any leaders, that includes ICPMs as well, but for any manager, any leader, how you show up really does set the culture that is around you.

(01:13:50):
I try very hard to show up very consistently every day, even though there will very frequently be things that are going wrong and are bad and are hard. It's actually very important to show up quite consistently. Certainly, in line with all the values that we have and the culture that we want to set, in order to really kind of model that at scale. Different days, that can be easier and harder. The final thing is, I think it's quite important to manage your own energy.

(01:14:17):
There are some tasks that I do that are maybe not the most important thing, but I know that I get a lot of joy and energy from them, and then that carries over into the other stuff that also needs to get done.

Lenny (01:14:30):
Just two more questions before we get to our very exciting lightning round. One is just I feel like Stripe is incredibly good at planning and organizing, prioritizing. I know every inside, it's always not as beautiful as it may seem on the outside, but what have you learned? What has Stripe learned about planning and prioritizing that you think other companies might be missing?

David Singleton (01:14:50):
Yeah. Well it's funny you say that. I would say planning inside of Stripe does not get the highest net promoter score that you might imagine. I do think it is actually quite effective. By the way, the reason I think that planning, the way we do planning at Stripe doesn't always get the best internal rep is we have grown very rapidly. That means that almost every time we come back around to planning, we actually, and this is kind of a theme at Stripe, we think about a lot of the ways that we work internally from First principles.

(01:15:19):
We will tend not to by default just pick a system off of the shelf that some other company has run or that we've used before. We'll think hard, considering what we are doing for our users. How should we do this? When we're thinking even first principles, we'll often go out and talk to a lot of other companies, and try to learn from their experience. It's actually something I've really appreciated and enjoyed at Stripe. A lot of the learning I've done here has come not only from folks that are at the company, but also talking to a bunch of folks that we have the privilege to work closely with because their business is building on Stripe, or they're a similar stage of scale to us.

(01:15:56):
A good example of this is Amazon. Amazon is a Stripe user. Because we work with them, in my first couple of weeks at Stripe, I was actually able to meet with Charlie Bell, who then ran operations at Stripe. A lot of the things that, sorry, who then ran operations at Amazon. A lot of the things that we actually now do at Stripe have come from learning from that experience. It wasn't just, oh yeah, we'll take this thing cause Amazon did it, talk to him. Lots of other companies hard to learn. The point is we care about learning from others and then we apply it.

(01:16:21):
Bringing this back to planning, because we tend to think a lot from first principles and we've been growing rapidly. The right planning process for us as a company has actually changed quite dramatically and quite significantly over the years. We do planning in a relatively deep way once a year, and then in a slightly lighter way halfway through the year. If you imagine doing someone once a year and you're growing rapidly, you're going to want to revisit exactly how you do it. I think for anyone who has the privilege of running the same planning process again and again, you can really iterate it and tune it. We've had to make more deliberate and more sweeping changes as we've gone along. There are a couple things at the core of how we do this. One is it's really important to focus on who are the users that we are seeking to serve for any given product area that we're working in? Kind of holding their needs front and center in your plans is important. Again, at Stripe, we do something that is, it's not unconventional, but it's not the most common practice in the industry, which is we work very hard to serve companies from the very, very small. The folks that are literally just starting their company on Stripe, with Stripe Atlas, all the way up to multinational, 10 Fortune five companies, fortune one companies, I guess.

(01:17:39):
There's a very different set of user needs across those businesses. For any given area, it's very important for each team to be clear about who are they serving. Then we run a kind of inverted W process. We typically have teams surface what their immediate thoughts are on the most important things to do. We'll then have a group of product leaders get together and try to synthesize the most important parts of that into a kind of draft overall company strategy, and then take that back down to teams to figure out, "Well, if that's where we're making a big push, should that tweak my plans at all?"

(01:18:13):
We bring it back up for synthesis, and then back down for everyone to really distribute with a lot of context within their orgs. We find that at our current scale, very, very effective.

Lenny (01:18:24):
I haven't mentioned this yet, but I actually, Stripe for my newsletter, I check the app many times a day, so I'm probably in the Fortune 1 million, somewhere in that.

David Singleton (01:18:32):
Do you have any feedback? Genuinely, I'd love to hear your Stripe feedback.

Lenny (01:18:36):
It's great. The app tells me that I'm ...

David Singleton (01:18:36):
No, no, don't tell us it's great. What bugs you?

Lenny (01:18:40):
Well, it's interesting for churn, for cohort retention, which I care a lot about for the newsletter, I actually use a different tool that feels like gives me better, a table of per cohort, how many people are still around? There's an opportunity to have better cohort retention metrics.

David Singleton (01:18:57):
Cool. Okay. Well, maybe we can email about that. Quite genuinely at Stripe, anytime we talk to a Stripe user, we are always looking for feedback that goes for any occasion. We often bring users into the beginning of our Friday fireside I already mentioned, and we're always asking them for their feedback and we really, really want to act on it.

Lenny (01:19:15):
Well, I wish I had more. It's works great. Final question, Stripe Session's coming up, it's going to happen before this comes out. What should folks be watching for? What's next for Stripe?

David Singleton (01:19:26):
We've touched on a few of the things that we're sharing broadly for the first time at Stripe Sessions on this call already. Per our development process, these have been in the hands of some Stripe users for a significant amount of time and we've really kind of crafted them with them. I'm super excited about a number of the things that we're going to be talking about next week. One is I've mentioned our revenue and financial automation suite.

(01:19:48):
We've really been crafting the features there for some time, and really nice example actually of how building closely with users really, really helps build things at scale. We've a set of features that we work with companies like Atlassian and CloudFlare to enable their businesses on Stripe Billing. They have relatively complex models. For instance, you might sign a deal where it has a discount in the first year, and then there's another product that's being used in the second year, and then something else happens in the third year. You can now model all of that in Stripe Billing, and we're going to be showing how you can do that in the dashboard at Stripe Sessions next week.

(01:20:23):
It's now going into general availability for all Stripe users. It's giving all of our users from the very small to the very large, the same power that the world's best SAS platform might have. Excited about that. It's also the case that we didn't talk about it in this call, Stripe Connect is our product for platforms of marketplaces. If I may actually just take one second, it's a really good example of how focusing on the needs of our users in one area took us into a really valuable space to solve for many users in other areas.

(01:20:55):
The ideas behind Stripe Connect came from working with companies like Lyft and Shopify. In the very early days, they were using Stripe for pay-ins, but we realized, "Oh, these companies are operating these multi-sided marketplaces, and there's a ton of heavy lifting you have to do to make that work really well." We have to have a bunch of regulatory licenses in place, but also there's a lot that you need to do to actually make the money move and kind of account for it in the right way. Connect is our product for platforms and marketplaces.

(01:21:18):
One of the things that we've done over the course of the last year or so is actually taken a lot of the features that we've built in the Stripe Dashboard to help folks manage things like gathering the right documents from their users, or handling refunds and so forth. We've actually made them available as embed-able UI components that are also completely customizable, which these platforms can take and put inside their own dashboards so they can present a lot of the power that Stripe is enabling to their customers, without having to do a ton of engineering work themselves.

(01:21:53):
Look, generating engineering leverage for our customers is just very frequently the main thing that we can do to help their businesses. We're going to show a bunch of that stuff next week, which I'm excited about. Then finally, we touched on it already, but it'll be great to show some of the innovation we've had around AI and large language models. Again, I think it's going to make a big impact over the coming years.

Lenny (01:22:10):
Well, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

David Singleton (01:22:17):
Most means that you have to integrate under the curve, so I'd say High Output Management by Andy Grove is definitely the book that I've recommended the most. It was a book that really opened my eyes to how to get the most out of teams over the whole course of my career. Definitely check that out if you haven't read it already. Recently, we talked about being meticulous in our craft. I've really enjoyed Build by Tony Fidel. Tony worked on the iPod, and then the iPhone, and then was the founder of Nest.

(01:22:47):
He puts a tremendous amount of thought into his users and how to build really great crafted experiences. I had the privilege of working with him very briefly at Google, but I thought the book was excellent in terms of helping provide some practical pointers there. Then I would be remiss if I did not mention Claire Hughes Johnson's book, Skilling People. Even though it only just came out, I've recommended it a lot. There's actually some stuff in here where I'm sharing some techniques that we've used at Stripe, so you might enjoy that. Then if I may share one ...

Lenny (01:22:47):
Here's my copy.

David Singleton (01:23:17):
You've got it too.

Lenny (01:23:17):
... it supports ...

David Singleton (01:23:18):
Amazing.

Lenny (01:23:18):
... Supports my laptop on here, and ...

David Singleton (01:23:21):
I hope you've read it.

Lenny (01:23:22):
I've had her on the podcast. I've read, I've skimmed it as much as I can.

David Singleton (01:23:22):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:23:26):
I'm not building a business right now. She was in the top 10 bestseller list on the Wall Street Journal, I saw.

David Singleton (01:23:31):
That's right, that's right. It has a ton of very practical advice, so I recommend that one a lot.

Lenny (01:23:36):
What's a ,favorite recent movie or TV show?

David Singleton (01:23:39):
Okay, I'm going to cheat here because I'm going to interpret that as what's the best video content you've seen recently?

Lenny (01:23:44):
Sure.

David Singleton (01:23:45):
I have fallen in love with YouTube for learning about the really fast moving AI space. It has been remarkably valuable, and Andre Carpassi has a bunch of really good seminars, but not just that. Across the whole spectrum, I think there's just so much gold on YouTube if you want to learn a new skill these days.

Lenny (01:24:06):
Is that the channel you recommend, Andre Carpassi's channel?

David Singleton (01:24:09):
His channel is awesome if you want to learn about AI.

Lenny (01:24:12):
He's the ex-Tesla AI?

David Singleton (01:24:15):
That's right. I believe recently, gone to OpenAI, but was doing this kind of on his own for a few months and has produced a bunch of great YouTube content.

Lenny (01:24:23):
Great pick. Most people pick White Lotus or something like that and you go with a AI YouTube channel. I love it. What's a favorite interview question you like to ask?

David Singleton (01:24:32):
Okay, well, actually, you will find some recommended interview questions from me in this book. One I really like actually, because it sounds like a softball and then it's not, is I often ask people, especially for leadership hiring, which leader that they've worked with they admire most and why. It sounds like a softball, but it actually tells you a lot about what this person really cares about in leadership.

(01:24:55):
Sometimes, I'll follow up and ask, "How does that manifest in your own leadership style?" Then, and this I think is really quite telling, I always ask folks, I'm going to spoil my interview question, I'm revealing it in your podcast, but I always ask folks, "Okay, so imagine you were their manager. Tell me the performance review or the development feedback you'd give them to help them be more effective." I think everyone always has things that they could improve, certainly myself included.

(01:25:22):
Folks' ability to think critically about someone that they kind of admire or lionize, and how they could actually be more effective, I find quite telling.

Lenny (01:25:30):
What are some favorite products you've recently discovered that you love?

David Singleton (01:25:33):
The products that I have recently discovered and definitely love is Mid-Journey, also building the business side of their business on Stripe. For folks who don't know, Mid-Journey is an AI tool for generating images using stable diffusion, but it's really pretty awesome. I've been using it a lot with my daughter. We'll come up with stories and we'll generate beautiful looking images with Mid-Journey, and then she'll drop them into books and she'll write the pros. The reason I think it's pretty cool is I was very surprised and skeptical at its UI to begin with, because its UI is Discord.

(01:26:07):
They drop you into Discord and you are in a channel where you have to prompt the artificial intelligence. I find it very confusing at the beginning. It's like, this is not the right interface for this tool, but actually, it's very smart because you learn from other people on Discord, how they're prompting the AI in order to get the kind of results that they're looking for. I find that made it possible for me to get a lot more power and value out of the tool. I definitely subscribe to Mid-Journey and have had a lot of fun playing with it.

Lenny (01:26:36):
What's your favorite image that you've created, if there's one that comes to mind?

David Singleton (01:26:39):
We made a cover for a book that my daughter is writing. My daughter is nine years old by the way, so we're talking here, good children's stories. She made an image of a wolf wearing a purple velvet cloak, sitting in front of a campfire with a shack in a forest and a nebula behind. It's beautiful. We actually built that with by combining two images, the wolf and the shack. Actually getting the wolf out of one image and putting it onto the other, we used the new Apple image segmentation copy and paste thing, which worked great. It's also fun combining these AI tools, but that one has been pretty good.

Lenny (01:27:17):
What a world. Two final questions. What's something relatively minor you've changed in your product development process that has had a tremendous impact on your ability to execute as a team?

David Singleton (01:27:27):
We talked a bit or about this already, auto deploys and that auto merge feature, but probably the most profound thing is we put a little button in every single developer tool at Stripe. It is an emoji of an octopus that is crying. If you click it, it makes it possible to just type in what's gone wrong. Then we have our developer productivity team read all of those and use them to prioritize what they're up to. Just like frictionless problem recording turned out to be really valuable. We call those paper cuts.

Lenny (01:27:56):
Crying octopus. I love that.

David Singleton (01:27:58):
Yeah.

Lenny (01:27:59):
Who else from Stripe or Former Stripe should I have on the podcast is my final lightning round question?

David Singleton (01:28:05):
I see how this works.

Lenny (01:28:08):
This isn't how this works.

David Singleton (01:28:09):
Two Stripes I think you should have on. Emily Sands is our chief economist and leads our information org. I think includes data science, but also the teams that build all of our, a lot of our internal tools. I think Emily just has great frameworks for thinking about how to translate what's really going on for users into great sets of metrics that you can then use to get the right action happening. As I described before, that's super important.

(01:28:31):
The second person would be Michelle Boo. Michelle joins Stripe as an engineer in the very, very early days, and has been with us for obviously a long time. She's really our principal product design architect in terms of the actual abstractions that we use to model our users' businesses on Stripe. I think she has very deep insight into how to think about getting those things right. I think you would enjoy talking.

Lenny (01:28:55):
David, I so appreciate you making time for this, especially during this hectic period ahead of sessions. Two final questions. Where can folks find me online if they want to reach out, maybe learn more about what you're up to you, and then how can listeners be useful to you?

David Singleton (01:29:08):
Cool. Okay. Well, I am @DPS on Twitter. That is definitely the best place to get hold of me, but you can also check right my personal blog at blog.singleton.io. Useful, honestly, please send me Stripe feedback. You can do that on Twitter. You can discover my email address on my blog as well. I would love to hear how we could serve you better.

Lenny (01:29:28):
David, thank you again for being here.

David Singleton (01:29:31):
Thank you. It was a lot of fun, Lenny.

Lenny (01:29:33):
Same. Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at LennysPodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
There's a lot of talk about productivity gains through AI. There's this camp of people that are so overhyped, nothing's working, nobody's actually adopting this at scale.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:00:07):
We see a significant amount of games. We find engineering teams that are very, very AI forward are reporting about eight to 10 hours save per week. Whenever I hear a stat like this, I think an important element is this is the worst it will ever be. This is now the baseline. The truth is the value is changing every day, so you need to ride that wave along with it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:27):
There's a story I heard you share on a different podcast where there's an engineer who has Goose watching.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:00:31):
You'll be talking to a colleague on Slack or an email, and they'll be discussing some feature that they think is useful to implement. Now a few hours later, he'll find that Goose has already tried to build that feature and opened a PR for it on Git.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:43):
What level of engineer is most benefiting from these tools?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:00:47):
What's been surprising and really amazing, the non-technical people using AI agents and programming tools to build things, the people that are able to embrace it to optimize for their particular workday and their particular set of tasks are really showing the most impact from these tools.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:07):
How do you think things will look in a couple of years in terms of how engineers work that's different from today?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:01:12):
All these LLMs are sitting idle overnight and on weekends, while humans aren't there. There's no need for that. They should be working all the time. They should be trying to build in anticipation of what we want.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:24):
What's maybe the most counterintuitive lesson you've learned about building products or building teams?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:01:29):
A lot of engineers think that code quality is important to building a successful product. The two have nothing to do with each other.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:37):
Today my guest is Dhanji Prasanna. Dhanji is Chief Technology Officer at Block, where he oversees a team of over 3,500 people. With Dhanji's leadership, Block has become one of the most AI-native large companies in the world and has basically achieved what many eng and product leaders are trying to achieve within their companies.

(00:01:55):
In our conversation, we chat about their internal open source agent called Goose, that by their measure is saving employees on average eight to 10 hours a week of work time, and that number is going up, how AI specifically making their teams more productive and the teams that are benefiting most. Interestingly, it's not the engineering team, what it took to shift the culture to be very AI-oriented, the very boring change they made internally that boosted productivity even more than any AI tool.

(00:02:24):
Also, lessons from building Google Wave and Google Plus and Cash app and so much more. This episode is for anyone curious to see what a highly AI-forward technology-driven large company looks like and can act like. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It helps tremendously.

(00:02:45):
Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 16 incredible products including Devin, Replit, Lovable, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD and Mobbin. Head on over to Lennysnewsletter.com and click Product Pass. With that, I bring you Dhanji Prasanna after a short word from our sponsors.

(00:03:12):
This episode is brought to you by Sinch the Customer Communications Cloud. Here's the thing about digital customer communications. Whether you're sending marketing campaigns, verification codes, or account alerts, you need them to reach users reliably, that's where Sinch comes in. Over 150,000 businesses, including eight of the top 10 largest tech companies globally use Sinch's API to build messaging, email and calling into their products.

(00:03:38):
And there's something big happening in messaging that product teams need to know about. Rich Communication Services or RCS. Think of RCS as SMS 2.0. Instead of getting texts from a random number, your users will see your verified company name and logo without needing to download anything new. It's a more secure and branded experience, plus you get features like interactive carousels and suggested replies, and here's why this matters. US carriers are starting to adopt RCS.

(00:04:06):
Sinch is already helping major bands send RCS messages around the world and they're helping Lenny's podcast listeners get registered first before the rush hits the US market. Learn more and get started at sinch.com/lenny. That's S-I-N-C-H .com/lenny. This episode is brought to you by Figma, makers of Figma Make. When I was a PM at Airbnb, I still remember when Figma came out and how much it improved how we operated as a team.

(00:04:35):
Suddenly, I could involve my whole team in the design process, give feedback on design concepts really quickly, and it just made the whole product development process so much more fun. But Figma never felt like it was for me. It was great for giving feedback and designs, but as a builder, I wanted to make stuff. That's why Figma built Figma Make. With just a few prompts, you can make any idea or design into a fully functional prototype or app that anyone can iterate on and validate with customers.

(00:05:02):
Figma Make is a different kind of vibe coding tool, because it's all in Figma. You can use your team's existing design building blocks, making it easy to create outputs that look good and feel real and are connected to how your team builds. Stop spending so much time telling people about your product vision and instead show it to them. Make code back prototypes and apps fast with Figma Make. Check it out at figma.com/lenny. Dhanji, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:05:34):
Thank you Lenny. It's a great pleasure to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:37):
I want to start with a letter that I hear you wrote to Jack Dorsey to convince him that he and that Block needed to take AI a lot more seriously. I think you called it your AI manifesto and it seems like it really worked. We're going to talk a lot about the changes that came as a result of that. So let me just ask, what did you say in this letter and what happened right after you sent that letter to him?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:06:00):
So about two and a half years ago or so, Jack really felt like things needed to change. I think he had a sense that the industry was going in a different direction. So he got about 40 of the company's top executives into a room on a weekly basis, and they all used to sort of talk everything through that was going on and he added me to that group.

(00:06:26):
So at some point, I observed that we were talking about lots of deep things, lots of relevant things, but no one was really paying attention to AI, and so that's when I wrote that letter. And to be honest, it's I think taken on a life of its own, but there wasn't much to the letter other than I think we should do this. I think we should do it centrally and it's important for us to be ahead of the game and be an AI native company because that's where the industry is heading.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:55):
Let me just say it's important to note you were not CTO at this point. You were just a senior engineer kind of person?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:07:00):
No, yeah, in fact, I was part-time at the time because I had just had a kid and I was coming back in and I was helping out one of the engineering teams and then Jack came over to Sydney and spent two days with me and both of us like long walks. So we walked all around Sydney and talked it through up and down, and then yeah, he offered me the job and I thought it was a great opportunity once in a lifetime, so I took it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:30):
It's like be careful what you're good at sort of situation. Okay. So what were some of the bigger changes that you made after Jack is on board and Block execs are on board of are, "Cool, this is completely right. We need to go much bigger and think much more deeply about how AI is changing, how we build and how we should build." Or some of the bigger changes that you made from a perspective of other companies listening to this, trying to think about what they should be doing?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:07:53):
At the start, my main focus was to get block to think like a technology company. And for a long time we had had a little bit of, I'm going to call it identity drift, maybe. We were talking about ourselves as a financial services company. Some people called us FinTech, all of this stuff. But when I started working at what was then known as Square, we were always thought of as a technology company just like Google or Facebook or any of the others.

(00:08:25):
And so I wanted to get us back to that. And so the first thing I did was to try and institute a number of programs that focused on that. So everything from getting the top ICs in the company together to talk to each other, to starting a whole bunch of special projects. So we got about two to five engineers per project. There were about eight or nine different projects and we had reinstituted, the company-wide hack week.

(00:08:55):
And so all of this just kind of created a little bit of a spark of, "Hey, we're building technology again, we're trying to push the frontier again." And that's how it started, and then there were a whole number of steps after that where we went from a GM structure to a functional org structure, which was I think the key to making our transformation into being more of an AI-native company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:19):
Okay, talk more about that. What does that mean? What does that look like? Why is that so important?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:09:23):
Absolutely. So when we were in our mature phase, so when Square was working quite well, it was a very large business, and then we had started Cash App and that also followed suit. We had spun them out almost as what we call a GM structure. So they were effectively run as a portfolio of independent companies and they had their own CEOs who all reported to Jack and it was still one single executive team, but they had separate engineering practices, they had separate design teams.

(00:10:00):
They were kind of separate in almost every way except for some shared resources like our foundational resources like legal and some platforms and things like that. So I think that that was very useful for us for the stage of company that we were in, but when you really want to go deep in technology, when you really want to connect with these things that are industry changing events that are happening, you need a singular focus, and we changed the organization.

(00:10:32):
So all engineers report into one single team now, all designers report into one single team and there's single head of engineering, single head of design, et cetera. And so that was the big transformation that we made, and that meant we could really drive forward AI, we could drive forward platform and just technical depth generally.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:51):
For companies that are struggling with this potentially or trying to figure out how to do this, two things I'm hearing here is start to see yourself as a technology company. It doesn't necessarily apply to every company, but seems like an important element is like we're building technology, we're not a financial company, we're not a real estate company, we're not a technology company. And then two is organize the team such that say engineers report up to an engineering leader versus a GM who maybe doesn't understand engineering as well or doesn't take it as seriously as they should.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:11:19):
Yeah, I think that's pretty much what we did. And not to lean too heavily on this, but this is what jobs did when he came back to Apple as well. He reorganized Apple to be functional, and it wasn't like we were following a playbook. We discovered this as we were investigating what it's going to take to make these teams more tech-focused and to bring our DNA back to our roots, which really was putting engineering and design first, which is what technology first means to me. So yeah, I would say to companies, find your DNA and really try to optimize for what that is in a very simple and clear way.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:00):
Okay, so you made a bunch of changes, you had this manifesto, everyone's on board, you made a bunch of changes. Functional technology first, comparing the way that your say engineering team works today versus two or three years ago, what is most different?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:12:13):
Not everyone was on board, I'll tell you that. It was quite a painful transformation. I think that one of the things that I learned the most throughout this process is that Conway's Law can be really, really powerful. So it's the law that basically says you ship your org structure. So what you're organized as in terms of teams, in terms of collaborating groups and your operating model matters a lot to what you build.

(00:12:45):
And so I think that that was essentially the biggest change is we had a lot of momentum in each of these silos, be it Cash App, be it Afterpay, be it Square or even TIDAL or music streaming service. And no one was really talking to each other, no one was really aligned on technical strategy on what we even wanted to be five years from now as a collective team. And so all those things are different now. I'm not saying it's perfect, there's still a long road ahead of us, but we at least speak the same language.

(00:13:24):
We're all have access to the same tools, we share the same policies. So a certain level of senior engineer means the same thing across the whole company. People can move from one team to another's into an area of need. All of these things are very different. But to sum it up, I would say we're technically focused and we're focused on advancing technical excellence as a goal. And that just really wasn't that true two to three years ago. There were other things we were optimizing for then.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:58):
Maybe going one level deeper in terms of how people actually work at a day. So if you're looking at an engineering team, say the average engineering team and maybe also the top most optimal engineering team, how is the way they work today different from a couple of years ago?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:14:12):
In the small, certain teams that are very, very AI natives or teams that are building AI first everywhere are working much differently than before because they're using vibe code tools and they're essentially building without writing lines of code by hand, and that just wasn't true through the three years ago. I don't think it was true anywhere in the world. So that's dramatically different in teams that are still working with very heavy legacy code bases.

(00:14:47):
It's less true, but they're also encountering these background AI processes. So we have these tools that run 24/7 or run in the CI pipeline and they're analyzing vulnerabilities. They're looking at even bugs filed on tickets and trying to build patches while engineers are asleep. So they come in the next day and look at it. So I would say there are a number of ways in which they're different, but different teams have adapted in different ways depending on how close they are to the tools.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:25):
Okay, so let me lean into that AI piece, which is I think where you guys are most ahead of a lot of other companies. You guys built your own agent I think is how you describe Goose. So there's a lot of talk about productivity gains through AI. There's this camp of people are like, you don't understand how much productivity there is to gain from AI. It's the future, this is the way it's all going to work.

(00:15:46):
We're all accelerating 10X. There's also this camp where people are like, I'm so overhyped, nothing's working. People talk about it. All these pilots are failing. Nobody's actually adopting this at scale. I feel like you're probably in that first camp. What sort of gains have you seen practically from AI tools on your teams?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:16:03):
Our number one priority is through automate Block, which means getting AI and getting AI forms of automation through our entire company. And we feel that that's just at the beginning of where the utility is with all these large language models, and I think we're going to continue to see that improve. But even now, we find engineering teams that are very, very AI forward that are using Goose every day are reporting about eight to 10 hours saved per week, and this is self-reported. And then we also have a number of check metrics to try and validate that.

(00:16:45):
So we look at PRs, we look at throughput of features, we look at a whole bunch of things and we have our data scientists come up with a complicated formula that tries to distill it all into something meaningful. And we feel across the whole company, we're probably trending towards 20 to 25% of manual hours saved. And I think that's just the start of all of this. I do feel that the more AI-native companies are doing a better job of realizing this.

(00:17:17):
So companies that started just with AI startups mostly, but there is some truth to this notion that AI isn't a panacea and it's growing as well in capability. So you need to ride that wave along with it. And I think a lot of the companies aren't realizing this. They're like, "Well, where's the value?" And the truth is the value is changing every day. And so you need to be adaptable and look at what the value is today and plan for what the value will be tomorrow and then slowly expand to the areas where it's most efficacious.

(00:17:54):
I'll give you an example. One area in which we find that it's really good is for non-technical teams to be able to build little software tools for themselves. So this has been one of the most surprising and energizing uses of Goose within Block is we'll have our enterprise risk management team build a whole system for self-servicing enterprise risk, and this is compressing weeks of work into hours, or ordinarily, they would be waiting for an internal apps team or something to go and build that and they would put that on their Q2 roadmap and everyone would be twiddling their thumbs until it all clicked into place, but now you can just go and do it.

(00:18:42):
And so a lot of these kinds of use cases we're seeing an enormous amount of productivity gain in the other area, which I'm really excited about is we have this other tool called Gosling, which is a goose for mobile effectively. So it operates your Android OS at a native level using the accessibility API. And we use that for automating UI tests.

(00:19:09):
So before, you would have to hire an army of contractors or QAs who would go and click through every screen, but now we can just bake those into automated tests and then give you a report at the end. So we're seeing a lot of advantages in those types of areas, but where you have a lot of depth and a lot of really strong people come together is where AI, I think still underperforms humans. And that's something that's probably going to get better over time, but it's also something where we should lean into as humans.

(00:19:45):
So when you have some very senior engineers and they're thinking about things like architecture and design and race conditions, orchestration, things like this, that's still an area where AI isn't quite there. And so I think the companies that aren't feeling the success in AI are trying to just throw these tools at their giant code bases and hoping good things will happen, and that's not how it's playing out. Eventually, I do think it'll get there, but right now we're still in the early utility phase.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:18):
Holy moly, there's so much there in what you just shared. There's like five things I want to follow up on. Okay, so one is this metric you kind of alluded to, which is how you measure the impact of AI in your team. So it was human manual hours saved, is that how you describe it?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:20:35):
That's correct. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:36):
So it's roughly a fourth of an engineer's time currently is being saved by AI tooling.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:20:43):
That metric is across all teams. So that would be our support teams, our legal teams, our risk teams, all of them together.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:51):
Wow.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:20:52):
And then on the engineering side, it's very variable because like I said before, it matters how big and how complex the code base is. And so if you're building a totally new Greenfields code base or you're building an app for a new platform, then we're seeing those pretty aggressive gains, but in very complex code bases that already exist, those gains are not quite there yet.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:18):
That's amazing. And whenever I hear a stat like this, I think an important element that people need to think about is this is the worst it will ever be. This is the lowest, this is now the baseline. And so it may not sound that crazy yet, but it's going to get crazy. Okay, the other thing that you talked about is Goose, you haven't explained what Goose is. This is a huge deal. Explain what Goose is and how important this has become to you guys.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:21:49):
So Goose is a general purpose AI agent. So you can think of it as a desktop tool or a program that you can download and install on your computer and then it has a UI. You can talk to it just like a chatbot and you can say anything from, "Hey Goose, organize my photos by category, and it has the ability to look within your photos and if there are a lot of trees, it'll organize them as nature photos. And there are a lot of people, it'll organize them as portraiture." All of this sort of stuff to writing software for you.

(00:22:30):
So it can do all of these tasks, and the way we've been able to do this is through something called a model context protocol or the MCP, which a lot of your listeners might've heard. And this is something that Anthropic came up with that we were a very early contributor to. And the model context protocol is very simply just a set of formalized wrappers around existing tools or existing capabilities. So if you have tools that you use in the enterprise, be it Salesforce or be it Snowflake or SQL, any of these things, you can wrap them in the MCP and then it exposes them to your LLM to be able to manipulate.

(00:23:16):
So until that point, the LLMs were not really able to do much other than chat, but Goose gives these brains arms and legs to go out and act in our digital world, and that's where we find it's had most impact and it's built on this fairly open protocol that anyone can implement. There have been an explosion of MCPs. Goose is entirely open source, by the way, so any of you can download it and extend it, write your own MCPs, and that's been our core successes through Goose.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:54):
Okay. So essentially like Claude code with a UI, desktop app sort of thing built on top of Claude and OpenAI ChatGPT and a bunch of open source models. Is that right?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:24:06):
Yeah, it can use any model. So we have a pluggable provider system and you can either bring your own API keys and use the Claude family models or OpenAI's family models, or you can use open source models and you can download them and use them directly or via Ollama and other, there are several tools that help you do that, but essentially it's taking the capability of these models to generate text and to interpret text and applying them to real world situations.

(00:24:42):
So one example that I really like is you can ask Goose to go and build your marketing report and it has MCPs to connect to Snowflake and Tableau and Looker. So it'll write SQL to pull out data from there, it'll do some analysis and a CSV so it can write Python code on your desktop to do all that. It will generate some graphs using some JavaScript charting library that it knows about.

(00:25:11):
And then finally, it'll put this all into a PDF or Google Doc or whatever and it can even email it for you or upload it somewhere. And it's doing all of this on its own, by the way. No one's sitting here telling it that, you're just saying, "Hey, I want this report, I want this emailed here, I want these pretty charts." And it's orchestrating across all these systems.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:31):
So essentially at Block, instead of using Claude or ChatGPT directly or even Cursor and all these apps, they use Goose?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:25:40):
Yeah, we allow our engineers and our general employee population to use any tools that they want. Goose is the one that's most well-integrated into all of our systems because it's built on the MCP and it's so easy to create an MCP for an existing system. So for example, if you're using a issue tracking tool and you want some AI automation added to it, before Goose, our teams would have to wait for the vendor to build that AI capability in there, or maybe there's some way in which OpenAI or Anthropic or Google would provide a general purpose capability where we could plug those in. But with Goose, that's no longer necessary with a few lines of code that an MCP represents. All these systems are orchestratable with AI basically overnight, and Goose can write its own MCPs. So it's pretty bootstrappable as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:43):
And this is open source and basically you've spent all this time building this thing, any other company can now implement it and build on all the work you've done?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:26:51):
Yeah, and we have a lot of companies using Goose pretty actively. I don't want to name too many names, but from our competitors to our close partners, a lot of them are using Goose pretty regularly on their teams. I know Databricks talks about it a lot, but everyone you can think of in this mid-tech tier is using Goose in some form.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:15):
That's insane. This feels like it could've been a massive business of its own, some of the fastest growing companies in the world, basically this is their product and you've built it and given away.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:27:23):
Yeah, we believe in the power of open source and one of our core missions is to increase openness, and that means contributing to open protocols and contributing to open source. And as a tech company, we're built on a lot of open source software. I think pretty much every tech company is whether you're talking about Linux or Java or MySQL or any of these essential components, and so we feel like we have a strong imperative to give back.

(00:27:57):
We want to build things that not only are good for us and our customers, but that outlast Block and outgrow Block, that's certainly a core value for us and has been from the beginning even long before this whole AI phase. So yeah, Goose follows in that proud tradition and yeah, we're very excited that its had the success it's had.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:18):
What's the story with the name Goose, by the way? Can't help but ask.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:28:21):
Goose is a Top Gun reference. So our engineer that came up with it. He also looks exactly like Goose, so it's kind of crazy if you put them side to side, he's going to be really embarrassed with my sharing this, but that's the reason why they call it Goose, and then we lent into the whole bird theme after that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:41):
That's incredible. There's a story I heard you share on a different podcast where there's an engineer who takes this to the extreme and has Goose watch him. Talk about that, share that story.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:28:50):
Yeah, absolutely. So he is very, very AI-focused and he's trying to extract all these crazy ideas from Goose and Goose can do all of the things that I described through specific interactions with tools, but it can also just watch your screen so it understands how to process images and process the things that it's looking at through screenshots. And so he built this system where it's essentially just watching everything he does all the time and he'll be talking to a colleague on Slack or an email and they'll be discussing some feature that they think is useful to implement.

(00:29:30):
And then a few hours later he'll find that Goose has already tried to build that feature and opened a PR for it on Git and all sorts of other wacky things like that. So it'll try to nudge him out of a workflow. If he's running over on a meeting and he's late for something else, it comes up with these creative things that he didn't program or he didn't write prompts for, but that it thinks will help him improve his productivity or improve his work day. So yeah, it's pretty crazy. You have to have the stomach for it to be that level of tied into your working tools, but it kind of shows you what's possible with tools like this.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:14):
Clearly this is where things are going. Once this gets good enough, I love this guy is just trying it. So it's basically watching him work and anticipating what he should be doing and does the work for him as a first draft so that he's like, "Oh, the PR is already done on this thing. We were just talking about it at this meeting." That's incredible.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:30:31):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:32):
How good is it? Where's it at? If you had to go zero to a hundred of like, "Okay, going to, all you have to do is now think and talk and that'll just do your job."

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:30:41):
Yeah, so voice is the other big part of it. It has voice processing capability, so it's always listening to what he's saying as well and trying to interpret that. I would say that this is mostly an experiment, given that he's on our core Goose team and he contributes to Goose, so he has a day job. This is a kind of thing on the side that he was developing.

(00:31:04):
So once this evolves into more of a native feature of Goose itself or other tools that we use in the enterprise, I think it can have a lot of legs, but it's already pretty good. It's probably cutting down enormous amounts of busy work that he has to do. So for example, one thing he'll do is he'll say, "Oh, I have a meeting conflict. I can't make it that time, or I have to go pick up my kid."

(00:31:32):
And Goose will automatically reschedule that meeting without him ever sitting in front of his calendar and clicking through 10 times. Yeah, so these are things that I think we were waiting for the calendar vendor to build as features into calendar, but we don't need to do that anymore because AI is able to orchestrate this for us.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:31:53):
This isn't that guy that had four jobs at four different startups that he was able to paralyze all his work and hire people.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:31:58):
No, it's not. He's someone that I've worked with for a long time and he's been at Block for a long time. He just loves experimenting and he embodies that culture of experimentation just like our creator of Goose who did the same thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:16):
So let me pull on that thread a little bit. You're kind of seeing a glimpse of where things are going. You're very ahead of the curve in a lot of ways at Block. How do you think things will look in a couple of years in terms of how engineers work, how product teams work that's different from today?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:32:32):
I think a lot of it is dependent on the improvement of LLM performance, but I can tell you the way I'm trying to change how I work and how I'm trying to change our immediate team's way of working. So I think vibe coding has been an interesting, exciting thing, which is you talk to a chatbot essentially and it goes and builds software for you, but I think this is highly limiting.

(00:32:59):
It's very ping pong. You do something, you wait for three or four minutes and it comes back with something sort of half-baked and you have to nudge it and guide it and massage it to get where it needs to be. I think that we're going to see much more autonomy. So where we're working on a couple of experiments with Goose, with the next version of Goose where we're really trying to push it to work not just for two or three or five minutes at a time, our median session length is five minutes and on average, seven, but we're trying to push it to hours.

(00:33:36):
We're trying to say, "Hey, all these LLMs are sitting idle overnight and on weekends while humans aren't there, there's no need for that." They should be working all the time. They should be trying to build in anticipation of what we want if we go back to the earlier part of the conversation. But also I think that they should be able to build in ways that were never possible before.

(00:34:04):
Before as humans, we had limited resources, limited bandwidth, and a lot of coordination overhead. So we would have to choose the best path to try in an experiment, and I don't think we need that anymore. We need instead to be able to describe multiple different experiments in a great amount of detail. And then maybe we go to sleep and then in the morning, all those experiments are built and we can sort of throw away five or six of them.

(00:34:34):
So one of the things that I do regularly, so I write code every day, but one of the things that I do regularly is just throw away huge, huge amounts of code, and it's kind of hard for me because I've never done that before. I mean obviously engineers love deleting code, but this is different. You build a whole new system or a whole new feature and you're like, "Ah, it doesn't feel exactly right. I'm just going to delete and start over."

(00:35:00):
So I think you're going to see a lot more of that way of working. And I think that you're going to see instead of us, for example, refactoring an app to have a different UI or to evolve into its new version, we're just going to rewrite that app from scratch. And one of the things I'm really pushing our teams to think about is what would our world look like if every single release, RM minus RF deleted the entire app and rebuilt it from scratch? And so we can't really do that today, but I think this shows you some of the direction of what's possible and where these tools are taking us.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:42):
What's interesting about that is that there's this common rule in software engineering and just product, don't ever just rewrite. Don't try to rewrite your thing. You're going to forget all of the small improvements and tweaks and bug fixes people have made over the years, and you think it's going to be the simple straightforward thing. It ends up being now it's like a year or more of just getting it back to where it was. And so interesting that AI now can make that possible, and what you're saying is that's actually maybe the way you should be working.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:36:09):
I think so. And I think that the trick is getting the AI to respect all of those incremental improvements, yeah, and sort of bake those in as a part of the specification, if you will. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:25):
Also, the point you made about this agent, just you give it a bunch of ideas that builds them overnight and then you could see, I imagine it goes even further up the stack and comes up with the ideas and then starts building them and then you're like, "Okay, oh, that was a great idea. Now I can see it immediately in the same workflow."

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:36:39):
Yeah, that's true. I was actually literally trying what you're saying just last week. And so I have this new version of Goose that we're working on and I was asking it to come up with ideas to improve itself and implement it overnight. And sometimes-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:57):
Slip problem.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:36:59):
... Sometimes it kind of goes off the script entirely and you have to sort of pull it back a bit. So I think we're not quite at that era where it's completely self-improving and completely autonomous, but I do think we're in a transition phase where we can give it that nudge and say, "Hey, here's my wishlist of 10 things that I wish you could do. Go and figure out the best way to do them." And it's successful I would say on 60% of those things, if the features are well enough described and it struggles on the remaining 40 where you have to kind of intervene and massage it. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:43):
Oh man, I'm just imagining this feature where you give it the goal of drive revenue and growth and then it's just like, "Okay, everyone's fired. Here's your paychecks. I'll take it from here."

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:37:56):
I don't think we're going to be there. I do think we're going to need a lot of human taste to anchor these AIs so they don't go off script to be honest. And that's really where our design lead and our design teams are pushing us to think, and that's a differentiator that I think will push us beyond this era of AI slop that everyone's talking about. So yeah, it's very much anchoring it into a thing that matters to people and the thing that's tasteful and useful and has value.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:30):
To make that even more concrete, is there an example of something maybe AI was trying to, or a team was trying to pitch where you had to just know this is where humans are going to step in and keep things on track?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:38:43):
I'd say it was more around things like process automation or a lot of times I'll get this sort of request where a team will say, "We need to buy this new tool from this vendor because our current tool is entering X, Y and Z." Another team will say, "No, no, no, we can just use Goose to build an app that will do the same thing for us in half the time or less." And then as a human, you're sitting there thinking, "Is any of this necessary? If we just change the process, do we even need to think about building tools?" And this is the thing that AI isn't good at, it's not able to have this portfolio judgment or judgment across a global sense of what's important and what matters.

(00:39:40):
So a lot of times, I tell teams just question the base assumption, particularly our InfoSec teams because they'll twist themselves into knot sometimes trying to secure something and you'll be like, "We'll just ask the team that's building it to do it differently or to not build that at all if it doesn't matter, and then you won't have to increase your surface area of securing it." So I think those are the areas where it's better for a human to use judgment and AI has not done a great job.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:11):
You make this point about building your own software, your own tools instead of buying stuff. This is a big question with AI, is it's going to replace all these SaaS apps to Salesforce over. Is there a sense of just either how much money you guys have maybe saved building your own stuff, or have you built a new-found respect for the existing SaaS software that everyone's using and pays lots of money for?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:40:31):
I think there's a trap in getting away from your core purpose as a company. And our core purpose is economic empowerment. So getting customers or merchants or artists the ability to make a sale or pay their rent or upload their latest creation to TIDAL. And I think that anything that serves that purpose, we should encourage and we should invest in, but if we're just purely looking at dollars versus dollars, then that's pulling us off that purpose.

(00:41:12):
The savings and costs that there might be in replacing a vendor tool by something you build in-house is probably not worth it in the mental bandwidth that you've lost and the amount of the team's technical focus that's being taken away. So yeah, I would say it just keep coming to the thing that matters to you as a company and then the rest will follow from that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:38):
Yeah, I think people forget just how much maintenance it takes to keep something you've built. Like, "Okay, cool, we built it in a weekend and now it's years of endless maintenance and requests and support." And also to your point, it feels like it comes back to the always motto of just focus on your core competencies and then buy everything else.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:41:57):
Yeah, it's the classic 80/20 problem, and we have that enough with the apps that we build for our customers. We'll build some great experiments that really resonate, and then we have to spend a lot of time ironing out the long tail of problems. So in Cash Card, for example, we built the entire functionality of Cash Card, I would say pretty much in a weekend or maybe a week of integration and work.

(00:42:26):
And then it took a really long time to iron out all these edge cases where someone would tip twice the value of the bill and then it would completely break something in the back end, or people would use it as a gas station and they have a different way of billing your card. So yeah, it's very much that. And to your point, I would always come back to what is the reason we're doing this? Why does it matter to us and to our customers? And if it doesn't clearly satisfy that, I would just push it off as a not interesting thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:04):
This episode is brought to you by Persona, the verified identity platform, helping organizations onboard users fight fraud and build trust. We talk a lot on this podcast about the amazing advances in ai, but this can be a double-edged sword. For every wow moment, there are fraudsters using the same tech to wreak havoc, laundering money, taking over employee identities and impersonating businesses.

(00:43:27):
Persona helps combat these threats with automated user business and employee verification. Whether you're looking to catch candidate fraud, meet age restrictions or keep your platform safe, Persona helps you verify users in a way that's tailored to your specific needs. Best of all, Persona makes it easy to know who you're dealing with without adding friction for good users. This is why leading platforms like Etsy, LinkedIn, Square and Lyft trust Persona to secure their platform persona is also offering my listeners 500 free services per month for one full year, just head to withpersona.com/lenny to get started, that's withpersona.com/lenny.

(00:44:06):
Thanks again to Persona for sponsoring this episode. One of the biggest parts of the conversation around AI is hiring jobs, things like that. So I have two kind of this two-part question. One is just how has the rise of all these AI tools, this increased productivity impacted the way you plan head counts and hire? And then what do you look for that's different in people you're hiring now that AI is such a big part of the way you guys work?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:44:34):
I don't think that things have progressed far enough that it's really impacted in a fundamental way how many people you would need to build an app of the scale of Cash App, for example. I think what's changed for us is much different and it has nothing to do with AI, it's what we talked about earlier is moving from our GM structure to a functional structure. And in our GM structure, our incentives were always to think of engineering headcount as a commodity.

(00:45:09):
And so we would just add more engineers if we wanted to build more features and the classic mythical man person month trap or whatever it's called. And I think that moving to a functional structure completely changes that and you're like, "Well, we can leverage common platforms, common modules, we can bring in experts from across the company to advise us on how better to do this."

(00:45:38):
And so those kinds of things I think have made it much different and how we hire and we no longer see engineers as a commodity to just add 100 people to go and build the next product in Cash App. But on the AI side, we're very much looking for people that are embracing these tools and that are eager to try and learn from it. We're not looking for people who are amazing AI practitioners on the get-go.

(00:46:14):
I think we have those people and we're interested in those people if they ever want to work with us. But I'm much more keen on looking for that college grad who just really is eager to learn about these tools and open to it, or even the veteran who has embraced these tools and figured it out. And that's kind of where we're optimizing for who we look for rather than a specific set of skills.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:44):
So essentially the biggest change is just looking for people that are embracing AI, not being like, "No, I don't need this stuff. I'm an amazing engineer. I don't need to use Cursor or Goose or all these things."

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:46:55):
Yeah, a learning mindset is how I would put it. This is something that Jack our CEO talks about a lot is he wants us to be a learning first company. So everything we do, every experiment that we ship, what can we learn from it and did we feel that we gave it our best shot? And I think that that's more important to him than even sort of coming up with the right business answer every time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:25):
What about when you're interviewing? Are you encouraging engineers to use AI tools as they're doing exercises? How did that change over the past year or two?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:47:33):
Yeah, we're starting to do that now. So traditionally we would just use CoderPad or something like that to wipe boards or a problem or even program it in Pseudocode or near Pseudocode. But now we're looking at can you use Vibe code to build something? How comfortable are you with these tools or how are you thinking about evolving with them as well?

(00:48:04):
But it's early days yet I would say that it's not clear to me that necessarily how someone knows how to use, be it Goose or Cursor or any of these other tools matters that much to whether they're a good engineer. I still think that things that we interviewed for in the past, a critical mindset, the ability to really understand deeply the technical nature of a problem is still much more important than whether you're a fully AI native programmer or not.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:37):
Another question that I've always been thinking about a lot of people wonder is what level of engineer is most benefiting from these tools? You could argue it's the junior engineers now, they could just get all this work done. You could argue it's senior engineers because they know so much more about how things work and now they could just orchestrate thousands of agents doing their bidding. What have you seen in terms of which level is benefiting most?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:48:56):
Yeah, so two answers to that. One is you're definitely right that the more senior and the more junior they are, the more comfortable or the more eager they are to adopt these AI tools. And I think that's for a variety of reasons, including some of them that you named. I think the senior people really understand in great depth how everything works.

(00:49:18):
And so they're almost relieved that this tool exists that can go and do all these things that they've done a million times before and couldn't be bothered. And then the junior people are like my niece and nephew on a BlackBerry or something, they're just blitzing through things, not BlackBerry in the early days and iPhones now, they're blitzing through a text message when I'm still seek and destroying through my keyboard, shows you how old I am.

(00:49:50):
So I think there's that, but I think the non-technical people using AI agents and programming tools to build things is really what's been surprising and really amazing. And I think that speaks to how these roles are going to evolve in the future. The lines are going to be blurred between whether you're in legal or in risk or in engineering and design even. And so I think that the people that are able to embrace it to optimize for their particular work day and their particular set of tasks are really who are showing the most impact from these tools.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:50:36):
It's interesting. No one talks about that element of engineering productivity, which is the reduction of asks from all the other parts of the company to build random one-off things. That feels like a huge productivity gain for engineers.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:50:47):
It is massive, although I think that it's a little bit like the analogy of if you build a bigger highway, you'll just get more cars on the road. So I think the fact that everyone's building software means that there's more software to be built, more coordination to happen, and everyone's more eager to ship things faster and with greater results. And so we're just seeing an overall uptake in velocity and the ask for more features, if that makes sense. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:22):
Absolutely. And it connects to your point about you're not slowing hiring. What I'm hearing is just headcount, hiring desires for more engineers, more product people is not slowing at all. You're basically, it's as if AI wasn't really there.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:51:37):
We're being more thoughtful about it. So like I said, we were looking at as a commodity in the GM era, and now that we're functional, it's much less about how many engineers we need as a function of the number of features we have in Square or Cash App and in the functional org structure, we think of it much more as what are the areas of optimization? Where can we build depth and what really accelerates our priorities through things like modularization reuse and going deep into platforms.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:12):
I love this hot take of if you're trying to be more productive, forget AI, just re-org into a functional structure.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:52:21):
It's not wrong in some ways. So here's another really interesting example where we are trying to improve our build times and you were using Goose and a lot of other tools to help us with this too, and they've done remarkable things. So we have this really cool tool that analyzes our test suites and selects the right test to run for changes that were made.

(00:52:50):
So we cut down basically 50% of test runs this way, which is pretty great, and we're not warming the planet as much with all these unnecessary CPU cycles being wasted on tests. But then things like offloading tests to the cloud or simply just deleting tests that don't make sense anymore, probably save you two to three times that.

(00:53:14):
So there is still a portfolio approach that you need to take for lack of a better term. It's like that example I told you earlier about should we buy a vendor tool? Should we build this in-house? It's like, "Well, do we even need to do this process at all?" So in some ways, structure matters more than the efficacy of the tools you have.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:34):
Wise words makes me think about Elon has this whole process for optimize stuff and one of the steps is like, "Do we even need this thing before we start out optimizing and automating it?" Before I zoom out and ask about just general lessons that you've learned over the course of your career, is there anything else that you think might be really valuable or useful to folks that are trying to lean in further into AI or just help their teams think a little bit more forward thinking?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:54:04):
I would say really try and use these tools yourself. So the way in which I think we've been able to drive most of the adoption is Jack uses Goose, I use Goose, our executive team all have used Goose and use it regularly and use other AI programming tools and assistance as well, and we do it every single day.

(00:54:31):
And so we learn a lot about how our own workflow can change, and that's going to tell you so much more about how are you going to change your organization's workflow than if you're reading a bunch of think pieces on LinkedIn or Harvard Business Review or whatever it is, and then trying to get your teams to follow suit. So I think we do this with everything. It's feel it, use the product yourself, feel it, understand its strengths and weaknesses and its ergonomics, and then figure out how to apply it to your teams.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:06):
Something I've found helpful in doing that, which I completely agree with, which is stop reading about it, stop listening to us talking about it, just build some stuff. The thing that I found really helpful there is have a specific task or problem you want to solve for yourself because that really motivates you and makes it very real.

(00:55:21):
For example, just the other day, I was trying to pull images out of a Google Doc. Google Doc, it's like I think of it as Hotel California. You put images in there, but there's no way to get them back out unless you do some crazy stuff. So I just went to Lovable and like Bill an app, or I can give you a Google Doc URL and let me download the images real easily and bam. Perfect.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:55:41):
Yeah, great example. I did something like this a couple months ago as well, where my son has a whole bunch of therapies, he has additional needs, and so I was trying to gather the receipts for all these therapies and share them with my wife and she will claim it from our insurer, and I was really struggling to do this because they're in various forms.

(00:56:05):
There are screenshots in some cases or PDFs or whatever. So I asked Goose to do this and it was all sitting on my laptop and Goose figured out that it could put all of these receipts into my Apple Notes app into a single note. It converted it to HTML so it would sync seamlessly to my phone and then I could email it or share it with her from there.

(00:56:30):
And that's just something I just never would've thought of. And it did this using Apple Script, so it just controlled my computer for me in the background. Yeah, so these are surprising ways in which these tools help us, and the more you use them to solve real problems to your point, the more you understand what their strengths are and where you can deploy them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:51):
I love this example. So did you just go to Goose and be like, "Here's the problem I have, how would you solve it?"

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:56:56):
Yeah, pretty much. I said, "I have all these receipts there in Google Drive, so we have similar origin problem there and I need to get them into a single form and I need to collate the totals and do all this." So it tried a few approaches first. It tried to download them and it tried to read them using a PDF reader and this and that. And then the thing about Goose that I think a lot of the other AI agents learn from us as well is if it tries a few things and fails, it'll back up and it'll try a different route and it'll just keep going until it makes some progress.

(00:57:33):
And that's what it did. Then it picked Apple Script as a way to do it because it had the MCP extension to control my computer, and this is the same thing that our engineer, we were talking about the other day uses to watch his screen and things like that, but this was a very focused problem and it managed to do that. So yeah, it's surprising what these tools can do and allowing them the flexibility to do that is a big part of learning how to use them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:02):
That's cool. I love the, by the way, can you run Goose as a regular person? Can you just download Goose and use that instead of Claude?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:58:08):
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. You can just download it from our URL. We can share it in the show notes for you and yeah, you can install it. It comes for Mac and Windows and Linux I believe. It's an electron app, so it'll work on all of them. It also has a command line, so for people who are more comfortable using that, we have that UI as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:32):
Wow, you really are competing with these massive foundational model companies building. What's the simplest way to compare Goose to something else? Is it like this Claude code, this simplest comparison or something else?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:58:43):
I think it's a bit different than Claude Code because at its core, Goose is a platform that implements MCPs. So MCPs give it this dynamically extensible nature so it can do all of these things for you, whether it's automating things like we were talking about with Google Docs and notes and things like that, or it can do straight up programming tasks for you using other MCPs.

(00:59:11):
It can index code and do it that way. So it's really more of an extensible platform. So I would say it sits somewhere between your classic AI assistant where you just ask it, "What's the weather today? Can you calculate how many months it's been since this date?" Or whatever it is, to the more focused cursors and Claude codes of the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:39):
Basically, it's everything combined wholly and free. You pay for the LM tokens, but yeah.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (00:59:46):
Yeah, there's not like an open source models which-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:50):
Oh my God, this is crazy. What a cool team to be on building Goose at Block. Must having must be having so much fun. Oh man. Okay. Let me zoom out a little bit. So you've been CTO in LinkedIn right now for just about two years. What's something that you wish you knew before you stepped in this role? If you could go back a couple years and just whisper a few tips and tricks or lessons into your ear, what would they be?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:00:13):
I think maybe two different things. One is just the power of Conway's Law, like we talked about before. It's like how difficult it is to change outcomes without changing the structure of relationships between people in an organization. And I think I always kind of knew that at some level, but really appreciating it in a visceral way is big. The other thing that I really learned the hard way maybe is you only hear about it when things are going wrong.

(01:00:49):
So when things are going well, you kind of have this eerie silence and you're like, "Well, am I doing the right things here? Am I focusing on the right problems?" So having a bit of judgment, having a bit of time to step back and look at things holistically, those are things that you really need to make time for and do on a regular basis, which I wish I had known when I took up the role.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:15):
Looking back at your time at Block, I keep trying to, I almost say Square because I'm so used to that over the air, but I know Block is the name of the broader company and Square is just one. Just so people understand, Square is one business unit, one product within Block.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:01:28):
Correct, yeah, we have Square, Afterpay, Cash App and TIDAL are four major brands, and then we also have Bitkey and Proto that are focused on Bitcoin for us and we chip hardware in those two brands.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:44):
Okay, great. I think that some people are like, what are you guys talking about? Okay, cool. So reflecting back on your time at Block, what's maybe the most counterintuitive lesson you've learned about building products or building teams that goes against what most people believe, say common startup wisdom?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:02:02):
I think code quality is one. Being an engineer. I learned this very early on and it keeps coming true over and over and over again. A lot of engineers think that code quality is important to building a successful product. The two have nothing to do with each other, but my favorite example is YouTube. I was working at Google around the time YouTube was acquired and I just remember there was this whole wash of angst about how horrible the YouTube code base is and how terrible their architecture is, and they're storing videos as blobs in MySQL and whatnot.

(01:02:41):
And you could argue that YouTube is the most successful product at Google by a long way, maybe more successful than many of their others combined. And so it really has very little to do with how well it was architected because the flip side of that Google video, which is product that I don't know if people remember, it existed before YouTube. It supported more formats, it supported higher resolution.

(01:03:11):
You could upload hour long videos, YouTube had none of this. It just had the one or two minute quick video thing and it's far and away, blown away its competition. And so I think just keeping that front and center is why are we building these tools or these apps or these products? They're for people to solve a specific problem. So in our case, it's for a square merchant to make a sale, to sell coffee to you or to sell something they've made. And that's really what's important.

(01:03:49):
It's not really important how well our Android platform performs unless it's serving that need. And so I think that's been a really hard one for me over my career. And I continually encounter engineers who think we need to refactor, we need to do this in a better way. And then I'm like, "No, all this code could be thrown away tomorrow. So just focus on what we're trying to build and whom we're trying to build for."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:19):
That is an incredible insight and lesson. This YouTube story is so fun and such a good example. You're saying they were storing the video content in a MySQL set like row and column as a blob data.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:04:34):
Yeah, this is what, I didn't actually look the code so I couldn't verify it, but this was the common wisdom. And then they had an entirely Python stack that was incredibly slow compared to the state-of-the-art C++ and Java servers that we had hyper-optimized at Google back in those days.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:57):
That is hilarious. It makes me think about also companies when you look inside a company, if you work at a company, you're just like, "This is just pure chaos. No one knows what's going on. This is just about to all fall apart." And that's basically what it's like at every successful hyper-growth company.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:05:14):
Yeah, there's some truth to that for sure. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:17):
And so I think again, it's just there's so much more that is more important to the success of a business. And it's what you said is are you solving a real problem for people? Can you get in their hands? Can you continue solving real problems for them? It's not about the quality of the code, it's not how well you operate internally.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:05:32):
Absolutely. I think on Cash App we had that as well. So in the early days of Cash App, I was head of engineering from when we were about 10 engineers to 200 plus and took us to about 10 plus or 20 million users thereabouts. And there was a very similar thing there. From the outside it looked like everything was really chaotic. It's like people would build random experiments and ship them and it just didn't look like we were following strict policies on things like software life cycle and stuff like that, and it was kind of true.

(01:06:13):
And my philosophy was always, we have all these brilliant engineers and I'm going to do more harm than good by trying to harness them into very strict blinkered areas. If they want to spin their wheels building something that is a complete waste of time for a little bit. But at the same time, if they're delivering these amazing things on the flip side, then I'll almost allow that. I'll be okay with that.

(01:06:44):
And it's a fine balance because engineers can really go off and into rabbit holes if you let them. But yeah, there's a certain amount of creativity that chaos breeds and you have to know how to build controlled chaos in some ways. So you have to create a foundation that isn't liable to rupture. You have major liability problems or something like that, or you're going to lose money in our case. And so as long as those things are bedded down and you allow your engineers to have the freedom to experiment and iterate and do the things that energizes them, that's the ideal.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:26):
Speaking of controlled chaos, one of your titles during your time at Block, I guess this was while you were actually at Square, was Mad Scientist for four and a half years.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:07:38):
Yeah, that was a time when I was working part-time, mostly because I had very young kids with lots of additional needs and I was a consultant on various different projects and I was trying to help some wacky things get off the ground. And yeah, I'm really grateful to Block that they afforded me the freedom to have that role in my career as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:08):
Maybe one more question before I take us to Fail Corner, which I'll explain. So you've shared a few lessons of things you've learned over the course of your career. Are there any other, just let's say core leadership lessons that you've learned that you think have been important to you being successful at the work that you've done?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:08:26):
I think start small with everything. If you try to boil the ocean to make a cup of tea, I don't know who said that, but it's a really a useful phrase that I keep coming back to. You'll never get there. So if you're making a cup of tea, just make the cup of tea. You don't need to boil all the water that there is.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:47):
That sounds like really not delicious tea. Ocean water.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:08:52):
Yeah, I think there's another one of, I think Carl Sagan said, "If you want to make an apple pie from scratch, you have to first invent the universe." So it's like narrow your scope to the thing that's in front of you and that's achievable. And so that I think is really important and that's one of our core tenets and always has been even when we were just Square in the early days, start small.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:19):
Is there an example that maybe worked really well or maybe didn't work?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:09:23):
Yeah, Goose started small. It was just an engineer working on their own time trying to build something that was useful and that satisfied a thesis that they had. So Brad, our creator of Goose, believed very early on, I think long before we heard the buzzword going around that agents would be how we unlock value from LLMs. And he built a proof concept and he shared it with a bunch of people. He shared it with Databricks and Anthropic, got them excited and learned a lot from them.

(01:09:59):
And so it just sort of built momentum from there. And even internally, it was quite a similar thing. Cash App itself was like that and Cash App started more or less as a hack week sort of idea and grew into a bigger and bigger and bigger thing. So a lot of our projects start with these small experiments that we try to then build on top of. We became the very first company that was a public company to launch a Bitcoin product. And that was again a hack week idea that actually Jack and me and another engineer worked on.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:40):
That was the hackathon team? You and Jack Dorsey and an engineer?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:10:44):
Yeah, it was the three of us.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:46):
Unreal.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:10:48):
Yeah, and it was great. We went and bought a cup of coffee, a blue bottle, and it was bought using Bitcoin over cash card. And I'll tell you those in hindsight, probably the most expensive cup of coffee.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:02):
What was Bitcoin at? 20,000?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:11:02):
I think it was 6,000 or 7,000 back then. I don't know.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:07):
It's like 120,000 now. Great.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:11:12):
But yeah, it's an example of how you get to a working useful product to people if you focus on a small thing first in a build.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:22):
And just to double down on this counter too. "Okay, we have a big idea, we're just going to put a bunch of resources on it and go big immediately."

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:11:29):
Yeah, absolutely. And I've been part of teams like that too. So in my career, I worked at Google on this product called Google Wave, which was trying to be everything to everyone and we were 70, 80 engineers building this thing before it even really had any users outside Google. And so I think that's an example of something that started big, tried to go big on day one and probably lacked some of that meeting the earth where reality lies and adapting accordingly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:08):
I remember Google Wave. Absolutely. It was beautiful. A lot of hype. I don't remember what it was for specifically, but it looked really nice.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:12:15):
Yeah, a lot of learnings from that one for me. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:12:19):
What else? Any other big lessons?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:12:21):
Those two are the big ones, but I would also say question base assumptions on everything. Sometimes we get into traps where we are as professionals, hyper focused on what we're building that day, that week, that month. And we don't stop to think should we even build this at all? Or what's the purpose of building this?

(01:12:46):
Could we build something completely different that would matter more to our core reason for being? So I would say, yeah, question the sort of base assumptions. It's somewhat of a cliche, but you really need to remind yourself to apply it over and over and over again.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:03):
I had a colleague of yours on the podcast back in the day, IO, who worked with you on Cash App.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:13:08):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:09):
He's a friend of mine, he's amazing. He had a quote along those lines of just like, I forget exactly what it was, but it was just get to the bare metal of the thing that you're working on, just touch the thing that you're building and go to the base of it to really understand what's going on. And I imagine that was really important with Building Cash App and Cash Card.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:13:26):
Yeah, IO is one of the best product people I've ever worked with and one of my closest friends actually. So absolutely with him, and you on that one, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:38):
Okay. I'm going to take us to a recurring segment on the podcast I call Fail Corner. You already shared one example of a product that failed that you worked on. I'm curious if there's another, and the question is just what's the product you worked on that did not work out? Because people listening to this hear all these amazing successful people come on the podcast, share all these stories of success, endless success, but they don't hear the stories when things don't work out. And so this question is just, "What's a product you worked on that didn't work out and what did that teach you?"

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:14:08):
It's a very valuable point. My career has basically been a string of failed product on top of failed product. And I think that, "Yeah, the Google wave example's there." I worked for Hot Minute on Google+, which was another epic failure.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:23):
Good one.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:14:23):
I worked at this social networking startup called Secret, which burned hot for a bright minute and then blew up. And then there was an email startup that we did, and that was, again, very promising, and then that fizzled. So the co-founder of Canva and I worked on that one. So there's been a whole string of failures, but at each point, I think I learned something and I learned that I need to never make that class of failures or errors again.

(01:15:01):
And so Cash App was probably the big success for me that a product that I worked on that was very early on and grew to be this giant business and product that people love. So yeah, been my career is essentially taking the learnings from all these failures, getting some humility out of it in the process too, coming into things, willing to listen to other people's points of view, critical points of view, and not just thinking that I have all the answers, yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:36):
And I bet all these products that failed had really beautiful code. A lot of really good architecture decisions were made. Some of them, some of them were awful in every way. So many reasons for it to fail. Incredible. Dhanji, is there anything else that you wanted to share or I don't know, double down on before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:15:59):
I would say I think that we're in this era of a lot of change and people are scared or reticent or uncertain about where things are going. And I think that look at the things that matter to you. For us, it's open source, open protocols, improving access for everyone. I've been very lucky in my career to only work on products that are either free or almost free to anyone or they have a free tier and then you pay for some premium services and that are usable by everyone. So anyone can become a Square seller.

(01:16:42):
I remember even in the early days, people used it to pay each other as a peer-to-peer money transfer system and that's why we built Cash App and that was really successful on the back of that. So I think it's really look at the things that are important to you and optimize for them. It's not really that important that the technology trends are growing in a certain way because technology is here to serve us, and if we have an important reason for being and an important purpose, then we can make that technology serve us. And that's much more important than being deep with the technology or being at the forefront of every trend.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:27):
Such great advice when there's so much to pay attention to and so much happening. So stressful to feel like I'm just not aware of all the things. I'm not as good as all these people I'm seeing on social media, but what's happening with AI, I'm just so behind. What I'm hearing from you is just like what is actually important to you? And just do that. Don't feel like you need to be the best at everything that's happening on top of all the latest AI news.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:17:51):
Yeah, exactly. And if it's not meaningful and fun, then you shouldn't be doing it probably.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:17:58):
With that Dhanji, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:18:03):
Okay. Shoot.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:18:04):
I see so many books behind you. So I love this first question. I'm excited to see what you pick. What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:18:12):
Yeah, so I very much of the opinion that you shouldn't read books that are about your daily work or your professional life. I read fiction, I read the classics, I read poetry, philosophy, history. These are the books I really enjoy. And I think it expands your mind and gives you creative ideas and helps you question things about the human condition.

(01:18:39):
And that's much more valuable than some self-help book or some get good at being an engineering manager book. So yeah, having said that, the Master in Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov is one that I really love. It's a masterpiece of Russian literature. And then I've always been drawn to Tennyson's poetry and I find that in the times when I'm most uncertain or grieving, Tennyson's poetry has always resonated with me and helped me find a center.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:16):
Wow. Never heard these recommendations before. I'm really excited to check these out. Very cool for a CTO of a big tech company. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:19:30):
Alien Earth I think is pretty awesome. It's by Noah Hawley who did the Fargo TV series. And so it's someone with all of these incredible skills in high art filmmaking who's doing a pulp sci-fi show, and it just looks stunning and it feels stunning and it captures all of that essential alien pulpiness that makes it so interesting and fun. So I really like that, and I'm also watching Slow Horses, which I think is one of the better shows on TV.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:04):
Love Slow Horses. The new season's Out, think the fifth episode just dropped the day we're recording this. So I love that show. Alien Earth also just watched it, so creepy and just like all these slimy, gooey little creatures just crawling around.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:20:16):
Yeah, I just love the aesthetic and they captured something essential about the original Alien and yeah, they do it, but every scene in Alien Earth feels like you're watching a painting or something or someone's reading a novel to you. It's really unfolds very thoughtfully.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:36):
I've never watched any alien content in my life and I really enjoyed Alien Earth. I will say the ending, I was just like, it felt like it kind of slowed down a bit. I'm just like, "All right, I guess I see where it's going now." But it was really fun to watch. Okay, next question. Do you have a favorite product you really enjoyed? Sorry, a favorite product you've recently discovered that you really enjoy? It could be an app, could be an gadget, could be some kitchen thing.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:20:58):
Well, I'm a gamer. I love playing games. So for me it's the Steam Deck, the Steam Deck OLED, which is their latest version. It's like this gorgeous piece of hardware that lets you play the best games out there, but it's totally extensible and customizable. And in this era where we're constantly told by big tech companies that we need to lock everything down, we need to lock down the user experience and customizability in order to have things work for people.

(01:21:28):
I think Valve showed that's totally unnecessary and totally wrong, and you can build the Steam Deck. You can install competing app stores, you can install Windows on it. You can treat it like a computer, write programs, which I have done to run on it. So yeah, I think it's an incredible thing and it looks beautiful and it works great. So yeah, big fan.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:21:50):
Do you have a favorite life motto that you find yourself coming back to often in work or in life?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:21:55):
If you're not waking up in the morning feeling energized about what you're going to do that day in your professional life, then change something, quit if that's what it comes down to, or find a new way of doing what you're doing. Just don't accept what's meted out to you. So that's how I've tried to do things, and sometimes it works, sometimes not, but yeah, it's a good thing to ask yourself.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:22:25):
I really love this advice. It's really hard to do that for a lot of people. Is there anything that has helped you get over that fear of just like, "Oh man, I'm going to quit this thing. I don't know where I'm going to go next."

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:22:36):
The main thing is telling yourself that a year from now, you're going to look back on what looks like a monumental problem, a life-changing thing, and you're going to be like, "Oh, that was so trivial." A lot of times we get into these traps where we're overthinking something or really nervous about making a change, but in hindsight, those don't seem that big.

(01:23:05):
And all the time that's passed since and all the events that have happened teach you that there's more to the world and it's never too late to do something useful or never too late to do something that's for yourself and improving yourself. So yeah, I think just kind of remembering that things are not as big or bleak or decisive as they seem in the moment is always important.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:23:30):
Final question. So you were a mad scientist at Square for many years. Do you have another favorite mad scientist from pop culture or real life?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:23:41):
That's an interesting one. I think the image that always comes to my mind is Doc Brown from Back to the Future. I feel like he's the canonical mad scientist of my generation anyway, but there've been a lot in video games and stuff too, but he was the one that was like, "I'm just going to do this crazy thing because I almost have this burning desire, need to do it, and whether I want to or not, I must build this time machine." And he spends the entire movie trying to fix the problems that it creates. But yeah, he has always been a really fun character for me.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:20):
You know what? I think about Pinky from Pinky in the Brain.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:24:24):
Oh yeah, that's a good one too. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:27):
Oh man. Dhanji, this was awesome. You were wonderful. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions before we actually wrap up. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, learn more about say Goose or anything else going on at Block? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:24:43):
Check out our GitHub pages for Goose and all of the other open source projects we have at Block. So there's a lot that's useful there. We do a lot on Android open source as well, so check that stuff out. You can always find me on LinkedIn, so feel free to connect. I'm very happy to be contacted.

(01:25:06):
And I would say the way people can be useful is, again, going back to this era we're in of a lot of change and uncertainty, I think people that demand more of their companies, of their employers, of their teams, demand something better. At Block, we always ask, "Can we default to making this open source? Can we build this for people that are not just us or our customers? Can everyone benefit?"

(01:25:37):
And I think that's particularly important in this era of AI where everyone's locking themselves in walled gardens and trying to capture parts of the platform that are emerging. So yeah, just demand more of people. The internet was created as a promise for open sharing of information to the benefit of all, and I think that AI should realize that for us. And so yeah, just demand that of people.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:07):
A really beautiful way to end it. Dhanji, thank you so much for being here.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:26:11):
Thank you, Lenny. I really appreciated it. Thank you.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:14):
I appreciate you.

Dhanji R. Prasanna (01:26:15):
Cheers.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:15):
Bye everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:00:00):
Everyone is striving for talented, skillful, smart people. Revolut values way more raw intellect and this unquenched hunger to build things rather than experience.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:12):
I hear one of the ways you approach early products differently is you guys invest a lot in actually making it good.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:00:18):
It's not getting traction. Is it because the underlying idea is wrong? Or maybe your product just sucks? By forcing everyone to build a product that people will love, we kind of cut out this part of uncertainty. We can cut down the product in terms of functionality to just most critical features, but we will never compromise on the quality and UX and the aesthetics.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:43):
Is there anything that you've figured out about just how to set up new products for success?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:00:48):
If something is 99% done, it's closer to 0% rather than 100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:53):
Today, my guest is Dmitry Zlokazov. Dmitry is global head of product at Revolut, which is a finance super app offering customer savings and checking accounts, crypto, investing, joint accounts, even mortgages. Not only was it last valued at over $60 billion, but in the research that I've been doing into which companies hire and incubate the best product managers, Revolut was right at the top alongside Palantir and Intercom. And so in our conversation, we dig into what Revolut has learned about producing and hiring great product leaders, including a focus on ownership, having people solve really painful and complex problems while making the experience wow and lovable by users. Also indexing towards hiring really smart and driven people early in their career versus people with a ton of experience in the space and so much more. If you're looking for a job that will accelerate your product career or want to help your product team level up, this episode is for you.

(00:01:48):
If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. Also, if you become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of Linear, Superhuman, Notion, Perplexity, and Granola. Check it out at lennysnewsletter.com and click bundle. With that, I bring you Dmitry Zlokazov.

(00:02:08):
This entire episode is brought to you by Stripe. There's a reason that I've had more guests on this podcast from Stripe than any other company. It's because they hire the best people and they build incredible products. You probably know them for their payments platform, which powers my newsletter, and also companies like NVIDIA and Salesforce and Zoom and DoorDash. What you may not know is that they have several other products that can help accelerate your revenue, such as Stripe Billing, which powers billing for companies that you may have heard of. OpenAI, Anthropic, Figma, Atlassian, and over 300,000 other companies. Stripe Billing lets you bill and manage customers however you want from simple recurring billing to usage-based billing to sales-negotiated contracts.

(00:02:53):
There's also Stripe's Optimized Checkout suite, which is a plug-and-play super optimized payment flow that natively supports over 100 global dynamic payment methods. There's also a product called Link, which is an accelerated checkout experience built specifically to increase your checkout conversion. Every single one of the Forbes top 50 AI companies that have a product in the market today use Stripe to monetize it. Half of Fortune 100 companies use Stripe. $1.4 trillion flows through Stripe annually, which is equivalent to over 1% of global GDP. Use Stripe to handle all of your payment-related needs, billing, manage revenue operations, and launch or invent new business models. Learn more at stripe.com. Dmitry, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:03:46):
Hi, Lenny. I'm happy to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:48):
As you know, I've been doing a bunch of research into which companies hire and create the best product managers, and I've been triangulating this across a bunch of different data points. I've been looking at which companies alumni product managers get promoted most when they leave the company, become chief product officers at the highest rate when they leave the company, become the first PM at a startup, also start their own companies. And when I triangulate it across all these different data points, there's three companies that are kind of sat at the top, you guys, Revolut, Palantir, and Intercom.

(00:04:21):
Clearly you guys are doing something really special. I don't think a lot of people, especially in the US know a ton about Revolut, and so I'm really excited to have you here. I'm really excited to basically extract as much wisdom as I can from you about what you guys have figured out in helping in hiring and training product managers. So I want to actually start with giving people a slight understanding of what is Revolut. I think a lot of people in the US especially don't know much about it. So what's the simplest way to understand what you guys do?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:04:49):
Revolut challenges banks in 50 different countries and it all started 10 years ago in London. So maybe let me give you a bit of a context, especially for someone based in the US, it's important to understand that European banking landscape is very diverse. In the US if you travel from state to state, things are different, but for example, you always pay in US dollars, right? In the UK you pay in British Pound. If you travel to mainland Europe, you will pay in Euro, but if you go to Switzerland, you'll pay in Swiss francs. If you go to Sweden, you'll pay in Swedish Krona and so on and so-and-so. Overall, there are 25 different currencies and every time you were traveling and paying in a different currency, banks were charging you exorbitant fees on top of terrible foreign exchange rates, and that's when Revolut launched as a multi-currency card and people loved it.

(00:05:51):
They loved that Revolut was saving them 50 or 100 euros, but even more so they loved the transparency and simplicity of the product and that's why when we started rolling out more and more products based on those principles, they were quickly getting trust of people. They were quickly getting traction. So that's how P2P transfers appeared, and then frictionless crypto buying and withdrawal to a bank account appeared. And then more and more products created products, savings products and so on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:27):
Awesome. And then just to give people a few kind of scale of the company, how many employees are there roughly? I think the last valuation something around 60 billion. I don't know if you can even comment on that, but just what are some numbers real quick for people to understand the scale of the company at this point?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:06:40):
The headcount is not something we're trying to increase, to be honest. Actually Revolut tries to stay as lean as possible, but I think it's just that our appetite for growth is so big that I think we're currently at maybe 6 or 7,000 employees.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:58):
Wow. Okay, cool. So let's get into what you've learned about building an amazing product team and also hiring an amazing product team. So first of all, you call your product managers product owners, and when we were chatting through initially it was like, "Oh, I see. It's just like a big scrum business," and they just have all these product owners who many times on this podcast people have talked about that's not actually a product manager, but that's not at all how you work. So in this context, product owner's an actual owner. Talk about just the story behind why you call your product managers, product owners.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:07:28):
Yeah, it's not a scrum term for us, it's just our take on emphasizing how ownership is important, really. So product owners are central to the company and its growth. They are end-to-end responsible for the product, for this part of the business, and for their customers to be happy. And for that, they do really everything. They run the teams, they define which roadmap we need to build to improve certain business metrics, and they also contribute to high-level company strategy, but then most importantly, they execute on it relentlessly and they are ultimate responsible for the product to be shipped and achieve results.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:24):
There's always this term of mini-CEO, PM as a mini-CEO, and it feels like in your context, that's actually what you try to do with your product team is they're essentially mini-CEOs. They have a lot of power. I think engineers, designers report to them. Is that right?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:08:35):
Yeah, correct. Well, I prefer to say local CEO.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:38):
Local CEO. Okay, let's talk about that. Yeah, yeah.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:08:42):
Yeah, but that's true. So the way we operate, we have these fully cross-functional teams, meaning they're staffed with all necessary functions, engineers data, analysts, designers, operational managers and so on. And we also operate in metrics. So everyone has a line manager and a functional manager. So product owner is always the line manager for everyone on the team, meaning product owner defines what they need to do, but then functional managers, they define how these things are need to be built and essentially with the right level of quality and so on.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:28):
I love this because it's so fun just to learn about such different ways of operating. Another fact that I saw is that there's two types of product owners. There's kind of like a UX product owner, and then there's a different like technical product owner.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:09:41):
We actually have three.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:42):
Three.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:09:43):
And the third type becomes increasingly more important. So the first type is UX product owners. Then there are technical product owners, and then there are data science product owners. So UX product owners are the ones who work on consumer facing part of the product. Usually they have a great taste for things and they understand what constitutes UX that will work and which things will not work. So they also have this expertise in the industry. Then tech product owners, they are the ones who delve deepest into details. Usually those are former engineers who grew into making decisions and driving business. And the data science product owners are usually former data scientists who decided to grow into management positions, but they're still very hands-on.

(00:10:55):
And you know what? There are way more things that are common to each of these three specializations. So what we see sometimes is people just shifting them because I would say that what defines the specialization is probably 5, 10, 15% while 85 to 90% is common to each one of them. And those things are, so first of all, being a great problem solver and have a great linear thinking, but also have a creative approach towards nonlinear problems. Then building this context for customer and building empathy towards customer and translating it into the team.

(00:11:48):
Then going down to details very, very deep because in our domain there are no obvious things and you need to get to the root cause of the problem really, really deep to understand what will work and what will not work. And that means that you also need to be quite technical, even if you are an expert, you still need to often go as deep as sitting with engineers and reading code. And then I would also emphasize the importance of business acumen because we tend to measure and quantify product performance a lot. And you need to understand, okay, what things will we build that will drive eventually that business metric and that target?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:41):
So I love this idea of the product owners having to go really deep. I think a lot of people hearing this, they think they can go deep, go deep, really understand the details of what they're working on. I'm curious if there's an example that's illustrative of just what you actually mean here.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:12:55):
For example, to provide the best possible product in every country of presence, we need to have necessary licenses. In Europe, it means that we need to launch local branches of our European bank, for example, a branch for France, a branch for Germany, or a branch for Italy. To launch a branch, you need to fully comply with all necessary regulation. You need to report necessary data on customers to various regulators and authorities. You need to register with local payment systems. And each of these things, they have a lot of projects nested within. We have a very lean team of just a few people who need to scope everything and do it at the scale of 50 countries. So the way we do it is we go very deep on example of each of these projects. For example, we launched a branch in Ireland, we launched a branch in Netherlands.

(00:14:01):
Then we reverse engineered what was the best process to do it, and then we went back up on top level and we said, okay, but what's the ideal framework of doing it at scale? And then we formalized it into a process really like an algorithmic process with steps and quality gates and assay needs, what people do we need to hire and how soon do we need to start doing that before we want to launch a new country. Then, so it's not only going deep, but also being flexible and doing this switch between zooming in very deep and then raising on the level of helicopter view and then understanding, okay, so this seems very, very complex in details, but then when you zoom out, how can we simplify it and build a robust process around it, which is scalable? And that's something that we have to do a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:05):
As you're talking and we go through this chat, I'm keeping kind of track of what I think is most contributing to your alumni product owners, product managers becoming so successful. So a couple of things so far that I think are probably contributing to this is one is just having a lot of ownership over what they're building, which leads to building skills to start companies and become leaders at other companies. So these product owners that you have are just own a lot and are essentially GMs of whatever product they're working on. And then there's this depth and complexity where you have to really get good at understanding a problem really deeply. I imagine many of these people go on to work on something like that later, somewhere else because they've spent all this time, or they just get really good at dealing with complex many layered problems. So is there anything else just kind of along those lines as I say that you think is important?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:15:54):
I would probably add an obsession with building wow product.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:03):
Wow. W-O-W?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:16:04):
W-O-W.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:16:06):
Cool.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:16:08):
I think in FinTech overall, this is probably the most neglected part usually, but it's also a part that we at Revolut, we pay enormous attention to. So it's not only when you do a trade in the app or when you send money, it's very important for it to be very fast and cheap process for you so that you don't pay a lot of fees. But we also pay a lot of attention to look and feel of the app and how smooth it is and how frictionless the process. Not only we invest in reducing clicks and optimizing finals, but we also want people to feel that we really cared about them. We also want people to feel that we love our customers and we applied extra effort for the product to look great and feel great. And I hear this a lot from our customers, like the app is something they really love and it helps them solve their problems. It's at least one of the ingredients of the company's success.

(00:17:22):
And I think people that work at Revolut, they built habit of paying attention to these small nuances, small details that make the product lovable. And then second is handling this context because it's a lot of details where you need to dive, but there are also a lot of dimensions where you need to dive into different details. And I think this ability to keep this large context in your mind and consider second order effects and view subjects from multiple angles, I think that this is also a very important skill that people usually train at Revolut.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:05):
Okay, cool. So we have three bullet points on the ingredients of great product managers slash owners that you guys incubate. On this wow piece, which I love. How do you operationalize this sort of thing? I imagine a big part of it is hiring people that are really good at this and value building lovable products. Is there any way you kind of have a process around making sure the things you ship are wow and lovable?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:18:27):
Two things that you need to understand about how Revolut operates is that we operate in small lean teams that are tasked to build products and as I mentioned, and having end-to-end responsibility for products. And usually they're the ones who build it from zero and then they're growing and developing this product. And then another thing is that company is very flat and hierarchy is very flat. We still have our founders, Nick and Vlad, very hands-on going down to details for every product and every part of the business. And every week they have product reviews with every team giving an opportunity to every product owner present directly to CEO and CTO and show what increment has team achieved in the last week, but also get steering from founders, which is super valuable.

(00:19:31):
Essentially founders of the company, they still review a hundred percent of screens that are being shipped and everything that you will see in the app pass this review. And there are a lot of eyeballs that were scrutinizing this and thinking of all possible edge cases and nuances that we need to consider to make sure that every single customer will be happy in this product, in this flow.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:02):
That seems to be a consistent theme in products that are incredible is the founders are deeply involved in the experience and review everything. How many product owners are there at Revolut? Just to give people a sense by the way?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:20:15):
Oh, I'm afraid to say it's already more than 150 people, maybe 170.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:20):
Cool. That's what I would expect. And then you said that there's kind of these three types, there's kind of like the eng type, the PM, traditional type, and there's the data product owner. When you hire the UX type of product owner today, is their previous role usually a product manager at another company?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:20:36):
Yes, but I would say that not necessarily it's a very experienced product manager. Well maybe even it's way more important to have this hunger for building things and having the raw intellect. And we always try to find people with these intrinsic traits rather than hiring people who are very experienced but maybe are not super excited about building things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:13):
What percentage of your product owners come from internal transfers from other functions?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:21:18):
It's a quite substantial part of product owners who eventually become very successful by the way. So it's like a positive self-select, so it means that someone already succeeded in another role. So it's a guaranteed culture match, it's a guaranteed domain knowledge, and then they simply grow. Usually it could be operations managers or engineers. They grow into someone who now manages the team and that's why it's a very successful path.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:53):
So the other company on the list of top three companies that produce and hire the best PMs, according to the research I've done, Palantir. I just had someone that was at Palantir for a long time and we talked about exactly all the same questions. And interestingly so far we have kind of these three bullet points in terms of what product owners within Revolut get to do. There's a lot of ownership, there's a lot of depth and complexity, and there's a lot of focus on wow lovable products. So interestingly at Palantir also tons of ownership, also tons of depth and complexity. The other ingredient that I want to ask you about is they also have this concept of a forward deployed engineer where they put an engineer in the office of the company they're building the product from, they sit there building it for them with them.

(00:22:36):
And so there's a lot of skills built in terms of understanding customer problems, talking to customers, getting empathy building, things like that. Is there anything you guys do or focus on around just like talking to customers, the way you approach having your product owners work with customers, understand problems, things like that that might be helpful for people to hear?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:22:56):
For us, it's a bit easy to reach out to customers simply because the customer base is so big, it's more than 50 million people and usually we ourselves are power users of the product. We receive our salary into Revolut and then we spend with Revolut, our friends the same. So it's like a no-brainer to talk to people continuously and even if you are not proactive in it, they will reach out. If you have a problem in the product, I guarantee that we know about it very, very soon. We've also built tools for product owners and designers to have an easy access to a panel of users via different tools so that they can just start an interviewing process or a survey or a test of different designs in a few clicks.

(00:23:52):
For me, it was very important to build this direct connection to customers because when you delegate such an important thing as customer research and collecting their feedback to someone, you will get a refined filtered version. You won't get these nuances of how people describe things, which emotions they feel like and so on, and where they think stuck. It's very easy to lose all those important bytes of information in this process. So I'm a strong believer that it's very important to have direct communication channel to customers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:32):
As you describe this, it's funny how you guys are at the extreme opposite end of the spectrum from Palantir in terms of how easy it is for you to get feedback. They build stuff for the government and for Airbus where employees would never use a product like that or need a product like that. You guys are getting paid in Revolut using Revolut to pay for things and constantly in the product. And so I could see why there's less of a need for something like a forward deploy engineer. Okay, amazing. Let's talk about hiring then. Is there anything unique about how you approach hiring, sourcing, looking for people, what you look for in people that you think might be contributing to your alumni being so successful down the road?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:25:12):
I think everyone is striving for talented, skillful smart people and experienced people. Revolut values way more raw intellect and this unquenched hunger to build things rather than experience. So let me maybe bring an example. Imagine we saw this, you hire a great experienced professional with amazing regalia of achieving a lot of things, but then what I see in product, the adoption curve is usually longer than in other functions because product owners by definition are the ones who are the experts in that domain and in all those intricacies of how product is built and how it's used. So what we see from these professionals is they still take a lot of time to ramp up and sometimes they also take time to adapt to new culture or worse, they just rest on their laurels. But you already have super inflated expectations and usually their compensation is by the way, quite high and which adds up to these expectations. And I myself, after conducting maybe 400 or 500 interviews with product owners at Revolut, I also see this.

(00:26:46):
Unfortunately, professionals with a lot of years of experience from established companies, they don't have this strong urge to change status quo, which by the way will require toil, tears, and sweat. And that's why even if a candidate doesn't have a lot of years of experience, but they love building things, they've done it, they worked with engineers maybe by the way, maybe in their own startup or one of the best profiles that I've seen is a tech co-founder. So I think that's probably the best way to boost career is to go and found something work in a startup, build things yourself or with a very small team, work in all different areas because in startup you have to work in all different areas. And then these kind of people, they really thrive at Revolut and even if they don't have a lot of years of experience, they actually attack a specific problem.

(00:28:09):
They have a sense of what can cause customer pain, and they are very fast moving to solve it quickly and then that's how they get appreciation from everyone around. The team starts respecting these people because they solve some specific problem and then they take another problem, they solve it and then they take another and that's how they grow in the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:33):
Essentially what I'm hearing is you hire kind of more junior or super high raw, intellect driven, passionate, how do you describe, hungry people? And this explains why so many people get promoted so much more that leave Revolut because they start their earlier in their career and you help them learn all these skills, ownership, depth, understanding, working in complex environments, building amazing products. So this all makes a lot of sense. Is there anything you figured out about where to find these people? Because this is the dream, hire amazingly smart people that are super driven that nobody knows about yet and then make them awesome. Have you found anything about where to source and find these folks?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:29:14):
So the way we work, we have a weekly catch-ups with the recruitment team. So essentially they are also a team that runs in sprints. So every sprint we define what do we want to focus on, which areas, which companies. One of the great sources is actually looking into products and apps that we love ourselves. So if someone built a great product, then it's likely a high performer. So usually we provide some great products in specific areas that are more important for us to the sourcing team and they just try to source targeting those companies. It could be also different areas. It could be even schools, like good schools. And so it varies from sprint to sprint.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:06):
That makes sense. Gokul had this really good piece of advice, I think it was on the podcast, if not he tweeted about it, where you look at there's successful companies, but then there's also what function in that company is the key to their success. And so you want to go like a company A for sales, company B for customer support, company C for design. And so it sounds like that's kind of the way you guys think about it a little bit. Yeah, very cool. Okay. I love how we're uncovering and we're uncovering this mystery.

(00:30:33):
This entire episode is brought to you by Stripe. Every single one of the Forbes top 50 AI companies that has a product in the market today uses Stripe to monetize it. $1.4 trillion flows through Stripe annually, which is equivalent to over 1% of the entire global GDP. And Stripe isn't just a payments platform. They also have a product called Stripe Billing, which powers billing for companies that you may have heard of, OpenAI, Anthropic, Figma, Atlassian, and over 300,000 other companies. Stripe Billing lets you bill and manage customers no matter your pricing model from simple recurring billing to usage-based billing to sales negotiated contracts. Collect and retain more revenue, automate revenue management workflows, and accept payments globally. Use Stripe to handle all of your payment related needs, including billing, revenue operations, checkout flows, or simply launching or inventing new business models. Learn all the ways that Stripe can grow revenue for your business at stripe.com.

(00:31:33):
Let me go in a different direction and see if there's more to learn here. When it comes to running your teams, is there something that is kind of fairly contrarian in how you approach running the product team that is maybe not how other companies operate that you think is key to your success?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:31:51):
I've changed in how I operate after I joined Revolut probably because Revolut is a founder-led company and probably it's because it's self-led, and also because my role is quite spread across many things. So my role at Revolut is leading product function across company, but also leading retail, which is a core part of Revolut business. And it's very easy to be spread thinly across all those domains and catching up with 50 or 70 projects that are being executed simultaneously, which would mean that you will just spend your entire week just catching up on statuses, not really adding value to anyone, but it's also scary to not do it because what if there are some things going wrong and you won't be able to stop it or steer in a better direction.

(00:32:57):
So I think that's why also a lot of managers, especially in senior positions, they kind of stay high level and they don't go very deep into details. But how we did differently at Revolut is to go very deep into details. We take maybe 7 or 10 projects which are most impactful for customers right now. And we go super deep into them, really, really deep sitting with engineers like reading code level and understanding, okay, how it's built exactly and what's the underlying issue. And you could think that, okay, but what about others? Let's say 50 or 60 items that are being executed. But the thing is that it actually, it's counterintuitive, but it works really well because first of all, teams, they talk to each other, there are formal and informal ways of communicating through meetups or just meeting in the office and they know which areas are being scrutinized right now and which team is being scrutinized.

(00:34:19):
And it also gives information on what are the current priorities in the company. But in addition, it's signaled to other teams that if they are not proactively executing things on the expected level, paying attention to all the details and being meticulous in all those details, especially in quality, they will be the ones that will be reviewed to a such deep level, next phase, next cycle. So as a result, it also builds a great discipline. And since Revolut is such a high concentration of very ambitious people who thrive for being best versions of themselves and grow, and it's very important for them to prove that they can deliver great things and build next great company. As a result, they do everything to operate autonomously. And when you start diving deep into details, you see that everything is fine, you see their modus operandi and you can understand, okay, if this team is on good track or not on good track. And if it's not on good track, it means that it probably will be one of your next areas as of focus.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:53):
Okay. So what I'm hearing is you said there's 50 to 60 things kind of projects being built at once.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:35:58):
Maybe closer to a hundred, actually.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:59):
Okay. Okay. So there's like a hundred things happening at any point like features being built, products being launched, and this is you and the founders choose 7 to 10 to focus on, or is it just you?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:36:13):
No, it's just me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:15):
Just you. Okay. And by the way, do you have a leadership team that you're a part of with a design lead or is it just you basically at the top?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:36:22):
So the way it's structured, my responsibility is a product function. We also have a head of design function. It's also part of my team, but then all the other functions, they are separate like engineering and data function, and all of them report directly into a CEO.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:41):
Got it. Okay. So out of a hundred things you choose, here's the 7 to 10 things I'm going to go deep on. These are the things that matter most to the business that if they don't go well, it'll have the most downside. And then you basically said you sit next to the engineers, you get really involved in every detail.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:36:59):
Yeah, correct.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:00):
Awesome. Okay. That is definitely counterintuitive. We had Brian Chesky in the podcast and the way he approached this problem is he just cut down how many things happen at Airbnb because he wants to be involved in everything. And so I think it's cool to hear a different approach where we can still do a lot of stuff, but I'm going to choose, I'm going to go deep on the things that matter most.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:37:21):
No, I think we'll never cut down things, it's just the appetite for growth and also entrepreneurial approach in the company is so high that we'll never allow ourselves to give up on some great opportunities, but also this approach is way more scalable. So while leadership and obviously founders themselves keep everyone accountable, go deep into details, it doesn't mean that they micromanage everyone. That's actually a very important thing. So the ideal position for any product owner is to be fully autonomous. And again, it doesn't mean that you will never be challenged, but if when you're challenged, you can show all the logic behind decisions you've made behind the roadmap. And even if metrics are not yet there, you will still let's say have this credit of trust to keep building things the way you want to build them. Eventually, yeah, you will be presenting the outputs of your activity on these weekly product reviews, but again, it's not a micromanagement either. It's more like, let's say a last line of control to make sure that what we're building all makes sense and that's value and is thoroughly thought in all details.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:48):
And then you said still every screen that is shipped, the founders review at some point, so it's not like someone's shipping stuff without the founders seeing it in some form.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:38:56):
Yeah, yeah, exactly. They have a full overview over everything, but also it allows us to build so many things because there is actually little micromanagement. If founders had to be involved into everything, they had to cut things down. But by giving people autonomy, they actually boost company growth. And as a result, I think Revolut is a strong outlier in the industry in terms of how many products being shipped and how fast they shipped. Another thing here is what I mentioned previously is us investing heavily into platform so that every solution is scalable from the get go so that we don't have any custom solutions. And for example, take our credit team, they ship new products like loans or credit cards in the country literally every month. And it is just maybe 300 people. And I think that a credit division in an incumbent bank is maybe 2 or 3000 people building just credit products for a single country.

(00:40:28):
And our team is building it for 50 countries. And yeah, it's enabled through this approach with platforms which we build on top of small lean teams which are fully equipped with necessary functions and also have autonomy in defining what they're building and the flat hierarchy with everyone being accountable and founders having direct view of everyone and intervening if necessary.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:07):
I'm going to give people a list of the things you guys do. I didn't do this at the beginning because it would take too long, but you talk about all the products you're building and all the things that's going on. So I have a list here. It's probably incomplete, but just to give people a sense, so you guys have credit cards, debit cards, savings accounts, multi-currency accounts, domestic international transfers, joint accounts, minor accounts for less than 18 years old, stock trading, cryptocurrency purchasing, loans. Is there anything big I missed?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:41:37):
I mean, some of those things are a huge by itself, let's say stock trading. It's not just stocks, it's also ETFs, bonds, and we're working on tax efficient accounts in different countries and crypto. We also allow staking crypto for example, we have on-ramp, off-ramp products, we have acquiring products. On credit, we have loans, we have a buy now per later product, we even launched mortgages. We launched first mortgages in Albania recently.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:17):
And then all of these across 50 different currencies and countries.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:42:21):
Yeah, 50 different jurisdictions each with its own regulation, with its own requirements.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:28):
Oh, boy. It's a good example of Paul Graham has this concept of schlep blindness or schlepping where people want to avoid hard problems, but that's where the big opportunities are, solving really gnarly, painful problems. And that's basically what you guys did.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:42:46):
Yeah, that's one of the things that excites me maybe the most at Revolut. The market is so big and there are still a lot of very inefficient players, and as a result, customers have a lot of problems that are unsolved. While we grow insanely and I think will soon be... When I joined, we had maybe just slightly north to 20 million customers. Now we are 50 million customers. Soon we'll be at 100 million customers. The degree of surrounding each customer with the ecosystem of our products extends a lot. So they become more and more people start using Revolut as their main bank account. They start receiving their salary into Revolut, holding their savings into Revolut because they love the product more. And so we can easily do another, I don't know, 2, 3X, 4X in customer base growth, but we can also do another 10X growth in how actively these people are using the product. So it's let's say what, 30, 40X to current, 45 billion valuation. Right? So it's a like a trillion-dollar company easily.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:13):
And on that note, I mean what I'm hearing is it's still a good time to join. There's a massive upside. So I know you guys are hiring, we'll just note that real quick. You're hiring product owners and a bunch of other roles, I imagine?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:44:24):
Yeah, yeah. Well, as someone who owns the product function, I'm especially interested in product owners obviously, but we hire a lot of roles. I think we have maybe 3 or 400 open positions currently.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:44:39):
Oh my God. Okay. I want to talk a bit about new stuff that you work on. So new products that you decide to invest in. Is there anything that you've figured out about just how to set up new products for success? Because a lot of the stuff we've been talking about is staying on top of stuff that you're iterating on and making better. What have you learned about just helping new products succeed?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:45:02):
Yeah, so we launched quite a few products that you actually maybe wouldn't expect from a bank starting with crypto that was insanely successful, but also non-financial services like booking a hotel through Revolut app, our loyalty program, rev points, which is sort of disrupting European market where people don't get great benefits from spending with card. In the US you can easily get, like what? 2% cashback with a credit card or in some sort of point. In Europe they don't have it. And we are actually the first to build a program on card spend rewarding people with really meaningful or monetary rewards. In the manner that I described. We understood, okay, what's the recipe of this success to then scale it and reproduce? So we built a new bets framework and essentially everyone can come up with a new idea. It could be a product owner, but it could be anyone, and they need to show some key important things which you usually can expect from a startup like market is there, business case is there.

(00:46:15):
We know that we can do it way better than competitors leverage and for example, some things that we have obviously some concepts of product and then what customer problem we're solving and so on. And there is very little bureaucracy, again, thanks to having founder hands-on, we can easily get a green light on anything, start launching it quickly. What we do is assemble same lean team with just a few people to build first version and then iterate and iterate. And the main thing here is to build first version very quickly to get feedback, but then not scale it before you polish the product. But then after we make sure that all metrics are fine, retention is great, we start scaling it. And the good news is that it can be instantly multiplied by our 50 million customer base and get great traction. So for example, one of the products that you mentioned, joint accounts essentially an account that you could have with a significant other one was one of the recently launched feature and it grew significantly and now it has over a million active users.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:47:33):
I hear one of the ways you kind of approach these early products differently is you guys invest a lot in actually making it good and not just like a scrappy MVP. Does that ring a bell? Does that resonate?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:47:45):
Indeed, that's what I may be meant by keeping your first version narrowed down to a small user base. But even in this case, we still make sure that the product is well. So no one is excluded from this requirement of building a super polished product. It takes time, but it pays off. The thing is that when you launch a scrappy version and it's not getting traction, how do you know? Is it because the underlying idea is wrong or maybe your product just sucks and you need to improve it? So by forcing everyone to build a product that people will love by building a wow product, we kind of cut out this part of uncertainty. So bottom line, we can cut down the product in terms of functionality to just most critical features, but we will never compromise on the quality and UX and the aesthetics.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:56):
An interesting advantage you guys have that I'm realizing as you talk is most of the stuff you launch is stuff that is clearly something people will want because it's stuff that they get other places, but they get the advantages of it being integrated into all the other features and products you have. So it's like a cryptocurrency product. It's kind of like, okay, yeah, people would love a great cryptocurrency product built into this or joint accounts. So there's almost like a benefit of just like, okay, the people will want this, now let's just make it work really well with everything else we got and not hurt. You almost don't need to be the best at every product, although it sounds like you still try to be the best.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:49:35):
But we must be the best. Yeah, a hundred percent.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:37):
But there's also, if you don't have the best joint account, but all the other stuff is awesome, people are like, "All right, it's fine. It just makes my life easier." But tell me what I might be missing because-

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:49:46):
So I think there are those kind of table stakes that we're building that anyone would expect from a bank. For example, savings account, right? It's just a basic thing that if a bank is not providing savings account, you wouldn't even consider it. But then we make sure that our rates are very competitive, if not the best. Then we make sure that there is no bad UX. Some banks, for example, they don't allow you to withdraw instantly and there are delays or they don't pay interest on daily basis. We will never do that. We will allow you if you want to move money out, you will be able to do it. You won't lose any interest. And interest is being paid daily and this is a fully flexible product. And then on top of it, what I would call maybe some delighters is we will allow you to open the savings account in many currencies.

(00:50:49):
So we want to add different currencies because now interest rates are going down, so people might find it valuable to open a savings account in, for example, I know in Europe, Swedish Krona interest rates are higher than Europe, but it could be even something like Brazilian Real with 12% interest rate versus 2 or 3% on euros. And then as the cherry on top, there is this all that in an amazing, you have very smooth, you can set custom wallpapers, you can set goals, you can automate a spare change towards your savings and all those features. So there is an underlying basic fundamental layer that where you need to be just on par with competition, but then there are a lot of things on top that just make people love your product way more. And obviously there are a lot of synergies in between those things. So yeah, thinking of crypto, you can just receive crypto on your wallet and then you can just instantly convert it to cash on your account or just spend it with your card. How amazing can it be? Just buy a coffee with Ethereum.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:09):
I love that. Okay, let me take this opportunity to try to summarize what I've learned from you so far in terms of what you guys have figured out about creating incredible product leaders. They go on to do wonderful things and basically one of the top three most successful companies at this. So there's kind of these two buckets as I talked to you and the Palantir guy, there's kind of like the hiring piece and then there's what you do to help incubate this kind of forge for incredible product leaders. So in what you do internally, kind of the four bullet points I've got here is give people a lot of ownership. They're essentially GMs of the product, the feature.

(00:52:46):
There's a lot of focus on depth and complexity and getting really good at solving really gnarly problems. And then there's a focus on building wow products, amazing lovable products that have a very high bar. And then there's kind of a subtle point that I think is probably impactful here is just working closely with detail-obsessed founders or product leaders like you and learning from you all and just seeing the value and impact of being super detail oriented. On that bucket, is there anything else that you think is super core that I missed before we get to hiring?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:53:21):
Yeah, I would just maybe highlight the aspect of this going deep into details. There are two main streams. First is let's say being technical, understanding how underlying systems work, but second is also building empathy towards customers. Understand the possible contexts and making sure that your product will satisfy each one of them.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:46):
That's a great point. So it's actually understanding the bare metal of what is happening and how it's possible, and then making the experience as simple and wowable as possible.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:53:56):
There is also a third aspect, but it's a boring one and it's complying with all possible regulations and making sure that your product will satisfy the regulator, but it's also an important part of the job.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:13):
What I get from that is just building patience with all-

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:54:18):
I would say it's actually being able to unblock your team and that sometimes require product owners to steam roll changes because it also means that you could easily get stuck with a lot of people just looking into each other and thinking, "Okay, can they approve it? Can they not approve it?" We try to innovate on it. We try to automate as many things as possible. We use even AI models for that, but it also requires a product owner to be able to get things done, just getting people down to consensus and understanding how your stakeholders, how to get them to the necessary decision and then blocking UTM so that eventually the value is shipped to customers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:10):
Awesome. So essentially it's just getting done, plowing through blockers, dealing with many stakeholders.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:55:18):
Yeah. That's always the most important.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:20):
Okay. That's a great addition. I could see why that would be really helpful for folks that are trying to get ahead in their career. And then on the hiring piece, what you look for is raw intellect, drive hunger, passion essentially. Those are the first two. And then interestingly, non-senior, not people with a ton of experience in the problem space, more so focusing on intellect and hunger. Is there anything else in that bucket that you think is important that leads to people being really successful?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:55:49):
Most importantly, it's again, getting things done, getting your hands dirty, and great product owners are very hands-on. They don't think of themselves as managers who just give tasks to people and wait them to complete it. They just go and get things done and they understand that most important things they will likely have to do themselves, and they understand that there needs to be relentless focus on execution, and if something is 99% done, it's closer to 0% rather than 100%.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:29):
Whoa, say more there. Is the kind of insight there is just things seem like they're 99% done, but they're actually very far from being done?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:56:38):
Sometimes the product is built, but then product owners are the ones who also make sure that, for example, customer care team or sales and marketing team are using it to a full extent because without it, it could be just another useless feature, and no one knows about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:57):
That is super cool. I like that mentality. Let me ask you something completely different. What's kind of the story of you landing at Revolut? I know you had to move your family. It was a whole adventure.

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:57:08):
My journey into Revolut actually coincided with me moving to the UK, so it was a completely new environment for myself. It's a huge stress load for the brain as well. And it's not only about using the other side of the lane on the road in the UK, but also it's a lot of things, for example, in the industry, some concepts that I've never heard about, and actually I've never worked at FinTech before, so I also changed the industry. So it was a complete turnaround for me and for my career, but I was very determined and excited about it because everyone who I've been talking to, they were saying Revolut is like it's top talent is at Revolut, all best product people are at Revolut, and I really wanted to be part of this great team.

(00:58:11):
Eventually it actually appeared to be advantageous for me because I also had this fresh view on things and even in the Revolut app, which is actually way, way better than other banks products. But even there I found some things that for me, because of this lack of context, they were not intuitive and I worked hard with the team to change that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:43):
Okay, great. I'm going to take us to recurring segment of the podcast. I'm going to take us to Fail Corner. So in Fail Corner, the idea here is people come on this podcast, they share all these stories of success, everything's always going great, but in reality, things don't often go great, and there's a lot of things that don't go right. Is there a story you could share where things went wrong in your career, where you failed with a product you were building or a moment in your career where things were looking really bad?

Dmitry Zlokazov (00:59:11):
I think the most spectacular failures is probably were on the earliest stage of my career, which I studied back at university and maybe in my second year of university I started building some things, different startups, and one of them was actually a product that makes me proud even now because it was like what, 15 years ago? So 2010, meaning still no one really had even iPhones back then and me and my friends, we started building a website that allows people to buy tickets to the cinema so that they can skip the line so they don't need to come in advance to select best seats and they can just buy a ticket online and go to the seats directly. Something that today seems as a commodity. Back then no one had it.

(01:00:15):
People were using pieces of paper and we built an end-to-end system because not only we needed to build a website, but we also needed to build hardware to scan those tickets, for example. And to have these tickets in digital format, we needed to hack SMS standard because again, people didn't have smartphones. They had these Nokias and we were sending images, QR codes inside an SMS, which is like a hack of the standards in a way. And then we were scanning those things with our own devices and we built our own devices with scanners, and we actually created these beautiful devices made from stainless steel, which looked really nice inside the cinema halls.

(01:01:12):
And I remember how I was excited about it with my friends. We were like, "What an amazing thing." It's like, look, we are bringing future here, but we actually spent all our investment on this hardware and we were expecting that everyone will just rush into using our system. But it was a very low share of customers who started buying tickets online because people were not ready for it, which was growing quite slowly. And eventually we had to close it because we simply ran out of money because we spent all of it on this hardware without any proven business model. So something that currently looks like an obvious mistake back then, we were just enjoying building a product that we would love to use ourselves, which I think is the right principle, but it also was a very painful lesson. You need to stay lean, you need to validate things before you scale them. You need to think way more about the run rate of your business. So there were a lot of painful lessons for me. Since then, I also try to avoid working with hardware.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:27):
I was just going to say that's a common challenge for startups trying to get right into hardware, although I wouldn't be surprised now if Revolut launches something another product, and this is a new product line of Revolut now that you've had that experience.

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:02:42):
We launched a POS terminals required.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:48):
All right, there we go. Dmitry, before we get to our very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that we haven't touched on that you think might be really helpful for listeners to hear? Maybe a last wisdom nugget that you haven't already shared, or even just something to kind of double down on that you've already shared?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:03:04):
No, I think that it was an amazing chat and thanks, Lenny. We covered a lot of different topics. I would just maybe summarize that if you're excited to build certain things, never hesitate to do it. The best way to do it is probably your own startup, and it also what will give you the steepest possible learning curve, but then if you want to join a company, try to choose the one that has the highest entrepreneurial spirit and that will allow you to work as closer to a mode of a founder as you possibly can.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:44):
That's a recurring theme in these conversations I'm having with companies that produce the PMs that have the steepest career trajectory. And so that advice is exactly what I'm taking away from this too, assuming you want your career to accelerate really quickly after you go work at this company. Okay, Dmitry, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:04:06):
Yes. Let's go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:08):
Here we go. Okay. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:04:15):
The Hard Thing About Hard Things by Ben Horowitz. Actually read it quite some time ago, but I found myself recommending it to other product managers most often. It's actually illustrative that to be a great product manager, someone needs to strive to being a great CEO. And besides this book emphasizes the importance of building systematic solutions and scalable solutions, which is critical for scaling a company. Also being honest on how important it is to grind stuff. And then second book is, I read it more recently, Build by Tony Fadell. I was really inspired by this one, especially given how I appreciate how it's not easy to build hardware and what Tony was describing there is just super exciting and inspiring. And also I think that there are different archetypes of product managers. There are people who tend to disrupt things more. Personally I think about myself as a builder, so Tony's principles that he highlighted in the book that they resonate with me a lot.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:44):
I'm trying to get Tony on the podcast. If anyone listening knows Tony Fadell and can nudge him, "Hey, say yes to Lenny," that'd be great. I've been in touch with his team, but he's not doing podcasts right now, but I'm trying to get him on. Okay, moving on. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show that you've really enjoyed?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:05:58):
I think the last movie I watched was Oppenheimer and I really liked it. I always love watching biopics. I think they give kind of a perspective and let you think about things in perspective.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:17):
Is there a favorite product you recently discovered that you really love?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:06:20):
Manus is a great thing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:23):
The AI agent?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:06:24):
Yeah. Yeah. It's just like I was super impressed how... I was mesmerized. It's so autonomous and smooth, and I just spent a few hours vibe coding and I created this JavaScript app that sends me a rare English word every day to learn and remember, and it worked, and I was just amazed.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:54):
What's a word you learned?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:06:56):
Ineffable. It was the yesterday's word.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:59):
I love that. It's still going. That's great. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to, you find useful in work or in life?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:07:07):
I love this phrase. I think Eisenhower said it, "Plans are worthless, but planning is everything." It's like we often say how important it is to be flexible and agile and adjust to change in circumstances, but it doesn't allow us to actually not have a plan at all. It's important for us to remember that we always need to think many steps ahead and while being flexible, we also need to think things thoroughly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:43):
Final question. For folks that are maybe checking out Revolut for the first time that want to play with it or already users. What's the most underrated feature? What's something that you think people should check out maybe they're not aware of, or even just like a UX, I don't know, animation, something fun that people may not know about?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:07:58):
The thing that is not yet widely used, but I really loved it, is what we call a wealth protection. So if you go to settings, you can enable a limit for any transfers outside of Revolut. If you want to do a transfer above this limit, you'll have to do a selfie check, which is our proprietary technology. We do a video selfie here. It allows us to make sure that it's you, no one else is doing the transfer, and it's actually almost as smooth as face ID and the way the team built it is really great. I'm really proud of those guys.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:08:38):
Dmitry, you guys are doing something very special. I really appreciate you spending so much time with me chatting through all the things you guys have figured out. I think this is going to help a lot of different companies level up the way they think about product and for people to join Revolut that want to experience this and accelerate their career. So thank you for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you if they want to reach out and how can listeners be useful to you?

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:08:59):
I think the best way is to find me on LinkedIn and yeah, I would be happy to receive a note from anyone on how we can improve the product and any feedback on the product. And also if you know someone who can be a great fit to Revolut after you've listened to what I've told, then yeah, I would be grateful for that as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:26):
Awesome. You're about to get a flood of applications. Get prepared. Dmitry, thank you.

Dmitry Zlokazov (01:09:32):
Yeah, Lenny, thanks a lot. It was amazing time. Thank you very much.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:35):
Same. Bye everyone.

(01:09:38):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Farhan Thawar (00:00:00):
If you do the hard path and it doesn't work, actually you still win because you've now done something hard. You've probably worked with smart people. You've learned something along the way that is valuable. I meet lots of job seekers. I go, what are you doing to try to find a job? Are you really learning anything from sending out 10 resumes a day? Why don't you look at the API Docs and build something? Even if you don't get a job at Shopify, you've learned something.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:20):
First, I want to talk about another theme, creating intensity in your organization.

Farhan Thawar (00:00:24):
Everyone says, "Oh yeah, work hard and do more hours when you're young, whatever." I'm like, "What if you just did more per minute?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:29):
The more I dig into the Shopify way working, the more fun stuff I never expected emerges. There's been a drive to delete code and simplify.

Farhan Thawar (00:00:37):
We have a Delete Code Club. We can always almost find a million-plus lines of code to delete, which is insane.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:42):
I found this great quote from you, "Not everyone can look stupid in public over and over, but I believe it's my superpower."

Farhan Thawar (00:00:48):
I have been in many situations with many sharp people who have said to me, that's the stupidest fucking question I've ever heard. My goal there is not to annoy the person, but it's to understand the content.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:59):
I was looking at your LinkedIn and your career history, and I noticed that you've worked for a different billionaire every decade of your life.

Farhan Thawar (00:01:05):
They're mostly different people, but they're similar in one thing is that they haven't...

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:12):
Today my guest is Farhan Thawar. Farhan is Vice President and Head of Engineering at Shopify. Shopify is an incredibly interesting company because they have over 10,000 employees who are fully remote, and even though they were founded almost 20 years ago, they continue to operate with urgency, velocity and have very first principles, ways of thinking, which translates into them seeing record usage, blowing away their earnings calls just recently, and building a beloved product. A lot of this is thanks to Farhan, who in our conversation shares very specifically what he's done to maintain intensity and urgency within the engineering team. Including their meeting cadences, the counter-intuitive power of pair programming, how they run meetings, how they cancel meetings constantly and so much more. He also shares his experience with indexing towards choosing the harder option when you have multiple options to choose from and why that ends up making your life easier.

(00:02:08):
He also shares a bunch of great hiring advice and a bunch of hiring stories which are going to blow your mind. He also talks about their engineering intern program where they're going to hire over a thousand engineers just for their intern program in 2025. I've had a lot of people on this podcast from Shopify, but that is for a very good reason because this company and its leaders have a lot to teach us about how to run an incredible business and build an incredible product. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It's the best way to avoid missing future episodes and it helps the podcast tremendously. With that, I bring you, Farhan Thawar. Farhan, thank you so much for being here, and welcome to the podcast.

Farhan Thawar (00:02:51):
Thanks for having me.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:02:52):
As I was preparing for our conversation, I talked to a bunch of people that you've worked with over the years, and there's basically three themes that kept coming up over and over and over. One is hiring, two is creating intensity in your organization, and three is choosing the hard path. First of all, does that resonate? Second of all, does it sound good to talk about these three themes in our time together?

Farhan Thawar (00:03:16):
Yeah, I mean, I have ideas on where all three of those things came from, and I think that it is something that if you looked back on my career, I've hit points on each of those things, but I don't think at the onset I knew that that's what I was doing, but it turns out in retrospect, that's what I ended up doing.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:32):
Perfect, so this is the Steve Jobs. Everything looking backwards it all connects.

Farhan Thawar (00:03:36):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:03:37):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX. If you're an engineering leader or on a platform team, at some point your CEO will inevitably ask you for productivity metrics, but measuring engineering organizations is hard, and we can all agree that simple metrics like the number of PRs or commits doesn't tell the full story. That's where DX comes in. DX is an engineering intelligence solution designed by leading researchers, including those behind the DORA and SPACE frameworks. It combines quantitative data from developer tools with qualitative feedback from developers to give you a complete view of engineering productivity and the factors affecting it. Learn why some of the world's most iconic companies like Etsy, Dropbox, Twilio, Vercel, and Webflow rely on DX. Visit DX's website at getdx.com/Lenny. This episode is brought to you by Persona, the adaptable identity platform that helps businesses fight fraud, meet compliance requirements, and build trust.

(00:04:37):
While you're listening to this right now, how do you know that you're really listening to me, Lenny? These days it's easier than ever for fraudsters to steal PII, faces, and identities. That's where Persona comes in. Persona helps leading companies like LinkedIn, Etsy, and Twilio securely verify individuals and businesses across the world. What sets Persona apart is its configurability. Every company has different needs depending on its industry, use cases, risk tolerance, and user demographics. That's why Persona offers flexible building blocks that allow you to build tailored collection and verification flows that maximize conversion while minimizing risks. Plus Persona's orchestration tools, automate your identity process so that you can fight rapidly shifting fraud and meet new waves of regulation. Whether you're a startup or an enterprise business Persona has a plan for you. Learn more at withpersona.com'Lenny. Again, that's with P-E-R-S-O-N-A.com/Lenny. Okay, so let's start by talking about the hard path.

Farhan Thawar (00:05:42):
Okay.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:43):
Advice that I've heard you share with people often is when they're trying to decide amongst a bunch of options is to choose the harder path because that makes life easier down the road. Share this advice why it's so important, where you learned, where you developed that this is the right approach.

Farhan Thawar (00:05:59):
But the short version is that if you have a choice and you choose the easy thing and it works great. If you choose the hard thing and it works great, you did more work, but if it doesn't work and you chose the easy thing, you've actually not learned anything because you chose the... You haven't done a lot of work, you haven't probably worked with the smartest people because they're not usually around on the easy path, and what happens is you've gone through this exercise and now you're like, I've kind of lost. I lost the choice, or I was trying to do something, it didn't work out for me. But if you do the hard path and it doesn't work, actually you still win because you've now done something hard. You've probably worked with smart people, you've learned something along the way that is valuable, and I can give you a quick example.

(00:06:41):
So I meet lots of job seekers and they're like, I go, "What are you doing to try to find a job?" I'm like, "I'm sending out 10 resumes a day." I'm like, "Okay." That sounds kind of easy, and are you really learning anything from sending out 10 resumes a day? Versus I would say to them, "Hey, you know all these companies you're interested in, Shopify might be one of them. Why don't you look at the API Docs and build something, build a Shopify app, build an admin extension, build something on top of Shopify." Even if you don't get a job at Shopify, which is maybe your goal, you've learned something, you've built something, you have things in your GitHub repo now and you can show people. You're learning about the product that might translate to a job you might get somewhere else. So I think that even though it's harder, right? Of course, you can't every day build an app on a different platform.

(00:07:23):
Maybe you can once a day. You will learn something in the hard path. And the same thing happened to me in taking hard courses. I would get worse marks, but I ended up meeting smarter people in those courses because they were there for the same reason I was because the content was hard. And so that's something that I've just realized in my life that if I do the hard thing and I just naturally tend towards doing that, I ended up doing... I went to Waterloo and I did a minor in electrical engineering on top of computer science, and when I did my MBA, I did a minor in financial engineering because the smarter people were in that path and they're still my friends today.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:54):
So building on the last point you just made, people could hear this and think, okay, if it's harder, that's going to be the right path. Sometimes harder is still a bad idea. For example, joining a terrible company that's extremely frustrating to work at or building, I don't know, a house in a really dumb way, but it's just really hard. What else do you find is important to think about when you're thinking it's not just harder, but also XYZ should probably be true?

Farhan Thawar (00:08:20):
Yeah, one real one is of course the people, because I find that my path has always focused on trying to pick the best learning journey. Where can I learn the most? And for me, everyone's different. Some people might learn better from books or the domain they're in, but for me, I learn a lot from people, and so I try to put myself in those harder rooms on purpose. There was a time when I was doing my MBA in financial engineering, by the way, and I'm a tech guy and still a tech guy, and all these people were going into finance jobs.

(00:08:46):
There was a point where somebody said to me, "Why are you in this class?" Because they knew that I was doing it for fun, and so it was because it was the learning journey. And so I would say a big part of it for me is yes, there's the how do you win even if you lose, because if it goes poorly, you can still come out of it with skills, but if you actually take the hard path, you'll have these intense working relationships with smart people that again will continue on in your life.

(00:09:12):
And that also just forces you to be in this constant state of uncomfort by going into these rooms and saying, "I don't know anything," and it's harder. And I agree with you. You don't want to do dumb things like, oh, let's just do this thing in a dumb way. That's not what I mean. I mean, let's try to do the hard thing that we can learn from. And by the way, it happens to be on the path. It's just is it might take more manual work or it might not be the way most people do it, but we think we can learn more from that path.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:09:37):
Speaking of that, I found this great quote from you, "Not everyone can look stupid in public over and over, but I believe it's my superpower and I try to make it my whole team's superpower too."

Farhan Thawar (00:09:49):
Yeah, I mean, it sounds funny, but again, I'm the one who's always trying super dumb things and sometimes they work, and even my wife hates that I try these things even at home, right? I'll just like, what's an example? It might be a new washing machine and I might try some weird mode with some clothes, and I'm like, "Oh, you ruin the clothes." I'm like, okay. But now I know that this mode should not be used, but maybe I would've uncovered that there's some super fast, quick wash that I can do in 20 minutes that now saves us 40 minutes of wash time every single time we use the washing machine.

(00:10:22):
So there's things like that, but I will ruin lots of clothes trying to do that, but the same at work. We'll try things and sometimes it can lead to disaster, hopefully not, but you can imagine people trying to like, oh, let me try this new configuration of GCP and maybe we'll get some benefit, but maybe we'll take Shopify down. We don't want to do that. So you want to have some sort of guardrails. But there is something around trying dumb things and saying dumb things. Half the time, by the way, when I say something dumb, people go, "I had the same question." They just were scared to say it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:55):
So for folks that may want to, because I feel like this skill is so hard, but so important, being okay with failing, being okay with looking dumb, is there something you tell people to help them build this other than just like, I'm genetically good at this stuff? What helped you become comfortable with being wrong and failing before you were a big shot exec where it's like, oh, he's fine. He knows what he's doing.

Farhan Thawar (00:11:17):
I don't know. I mean, I kind of grew up working in retail and people come into the store, and then I would say, "Hey," and you're working on commission, and they're not always buying stuff, and if they don't buy it, you don't make any money. And so maybe just the fact of going up and forcing myself to talk to people and then trying to get them to, and maybe you spend an hour with a client and then they don't buy anything, but you're getting that reaction of a bunch of negatives, and all you have to do is say, okay, and just go to the next customer. You can't really well on it and be like, oh my God, my whole day is ruined. But instead, you have to learn from that and say, "Okay, let me try this. Let me try that." And it's not easy, but it was a way to build up some confidence and people say, this telemarketing, or there's a bunch of things you can do to get a lot of rejection. Cold calling is another one, and that can lead you to actually building up resistance. I don't know if I'm genetically better at it or not. I just think that I literally don't care if I look dumb. I've always said the dumb thing, I'm not doing things on purpose to get nos, which by the way, is part of some sales training, which is go and get 10 nos. But I haven't done that. But I have been in many situations with many sharp people, business people, successful people who have said to me... Turn around and said, "That's the stupidest fucking question I've ever heard." I've definitely had that happen to me. And I'm like, "All right, let's move on to the next question."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:36):
I love that attitude and I think that's key to it. It's just bounce off of it and not be crumble and I think it's empowering for folks to hear from someone like you that has done so well that people tell you that is the dumbest question I've ever heard-

Farhan Thawar (00:12:48):
Oh yeah, still.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:48):
Still. Okay.

Farhan Thawar (00:12:50):
Yeah. So how about this? That I heard that's the dumbest fucking question. And then recently I heard, I've already explained this to you three times because I kept asking and I didn't understand, and literally I got this message back saying, "I've already explained this to you three times." I'm like, "Okay, I still don't get it." So my goal there is not to annoy the person, but it's to understand the content. And actually, by the way, I say these were messages, I saved them. I literally screenshot it because I'm like, remember this? It doesn't matter. I'm trying to learn.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:13:20):
One more question along these lines. I was looking at your LinkedIn and your career history, and I noticed that you worked for a different billionaire every decade of your life. So there's a guy named Joe Lemond in your twenties and Chamath in your thirties and Toby this decade, maybe yourself next decade, if things go well. Other than what you've shared or maybe it is what you've shared, is there a thread across these three folks that have been really successful that you've learned from that maybe is consistent across them all or even just specific to each one?

Farhan Thawar (00:13:49):
It's interesting because again, this is looking back, you're like, wait a sec, I didn't plan it this way. There's no way you could plan it, right? I'm going to work for a different billionaire every decade. That's not how it works but they're similar. They're mostly different people, but they're similar in one thing is that they have an irrational view of what the world should look like over the next decade or so. They're very long-term thinkers, very rational in that they'll look and say, "Hey, in 10, 15, 20, 25 years, this is what the world's going to look like." And I'm not good at seeing that vision, but I'm good at trying to move towards that vision 1% a week. And so the melding of the two, I know where I'm good and I'm good at pushing the ball forward. And if they're good at the long-term vision, we can both align to say, "You're good at this thing. I'm good at this thing. Why don't we merge forces?"

(00:14:35):
And so that is something that has resonated with me is like, how do I find these irrational all progress depends on the unreasonable man. How do I pair with these people because I'm altogether too reasonable and there's no way for me to become unreasonable, and so I have to merge with these people. And so that is again, something that I specifically have sought out. And even when I was starting my own company in 2015, I actually sat down and wrote a list of all the unreasonable people that I knew in Toronto, and I went down the list and met every single one of these entrepreneurs to figure out are we API compatible and could I work with them? And I ended up picking one of them and starting a company.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:15):
That is an amazing story. So first of all, I just love this insight that being aware of this is not a superpower of mine and I'm not going to try to build it. I'm going to find someone to merge with, and connect your APIs together and be the person that builds it, not the person that envisions what to build. I think that's awesome because a lot of people... I need to get good at all these things. I need to become the best at vision and strategy and execution and collaboration and then all these things. And so I think alone, this isn't really interesting instead it's just recognize your strengths and weaknesses and double down on your strengths.

Farhan Thawar (00:15:47):
Yeah, it sounds funny, but me and you talked about it that a framework I wrote down, which I tweet out, me writing that down changed how I picked jobs forever, right? Because I had this lull after my first job in between where I was trying to figure out why nothing felt as exciting as my first job. And it turns out that it took me to sit down and be like, what do I actually care about? And people can get confused. I get confused all the time, by the way, by things that are not on my framework. So for example, a good one, title, company, money, all these things can confuse you because you could have somebody say recruiter messages you and says, "Hey, by the way, here's a new job and here's the compensation." You're like, "Oh my God, this is exciting." And if you don't have a written down framework of the things you actually care about, it's very hard to be distracted. So very hard not to be distracted. You get distracted by that. So instead, I look at the framework and go, does this align with my framework? Right?

(00:16:43):
Actually to the point of, I actually sent my framework to a recruiter one time and I said, "Hey, this thing," because they kept going back and forth to me and I go, "Hey, this doesn't align with my framework." So it really saves me time from not being distracted, but it also forced me to think about every year I can reevaluate what I'm doing and look at the framework and say, "Is this true to my values?" Now, my wife will say this, that I'm like a robot. When I realize that my framework is being violated, I will resign instantly and I've done that before. So without even having another job or anything, I just go like, oh, my framework is being violated and then resign. There's this thing where I know what I enjoy working on, and that framework helps me find it. And so I encourage everyone, anybody looking for a job I always say, "Write down a framework. You can use mine as inspiration, but figure out what you care about and make sure that what you're working on lines up with that."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:37):
And this framework is the questions to ask about where to go work. That's your framework. Okay, cool. We'll link to that so folks can check it out. The example of you resigning when it didn't meet your framework, is that a story you're up for sharing? Is there something to learn from that?

Farhan Thawar (00:17:50):
Yeah, sure. So this happened when I was at my previous, a few companies ago, we were running a mobile company called Xtreme Labs. That was the one that Chamath was the major investor in and so we worked with him directly. And what I realized was... And so that company was amazing. We worked on it for many years. It was a mobile app development company. We got to work on mobile apps for the biggest brands in the world, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Vine, the NFL, NBA, Bloomberg, Slack, you name it we worked on those mobile apps, and this is right when the iPhone and Android were really gaining steam in '09 to 2013 era. And then we eventually got acquired by Pivotal. And over time, my role at Pivotal, Pivotal, and Pivotal Labs changed from, hey, I was running the biggest office in the world. I was running the biggest pair programming office.

(00:18:34):
I'm a big fan of pair programming to one in which we were really trying to attach consulting to the product. And I ended up being a field CTO, which really, I mean it was fun to learn about that world, but it was different than what I was doing. And so if I looked across my framework, it was violating all the things that I was trying to work. I wasn't working with the smartest people anymore. I was on IC. I wasn't learning as much as I could be learning. And so I wasn't on this and I wasn't having a lot of impact. I was like, oh, wait a sec, this is completely not aligned. And then I just told the team, "Hey, I plan on resigning." And that, by the way, led to great other things because I'm an investor in new companies that have spun out from there and it was a great experience. I'm just saying it at the time, lended me to say, "Hey, you're not actually focused on the right things."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:20):
I want to come back to Xtreme Labs. I know there's other stories there that are interesting, but first I want to talk about another theme of things that people often raised when I asked them about you. And this one is intensity, and it's specifically creating intensity in your organization and the value of that, the power of that. I've seen that the way you describe this and I love is how do you expend more kilojoules per hour versus spend more hours on work. So talk about just why intensity, first of all, is so important to an organization.

Farhan Thawar (00:19:53):
Yeah. So I think there's a few things. One, I have this fundamental belief that one hour is one hour. It's the same hour. If you spend an hour or I spend an hour, it's the same time that goes by. And if I just expend more calories in that hour. Let's say we both work nine to five. If I can just get more done in the nine-to-five, we have both... The time has elapsed the same for us, but I just got more done. And that allows me, of course, then I'd be like, "Hey, I'm going to take my kid to soccer and do other stuff." We can still do the same things out of work, but during work, I just want to try to get as much done as possible during the time versus expanding the time and I can give you an example. I used to work at a company where it was like I worked 12 hours a day, but I was playing foosball in the middle of the day.

(00:20:37):
And then we'd go for a coffee break and you do these things. And of course, the time expanded to 12 hours versus trying to compress into that eight-hour day. And pair programming is a great example because, so it's such an intense activity. Two people on one machine, you can get so much done when two people are working together, not being distracted by the internet and distractions, and just focus on writing the solution to the problem at hand. And it's so tiring that usually when people switch on to pair programming, they sleep 10 to 12 hours a night the first few nights because it's so intense. You're working so hard. But for me, that intensity actually leads to extraordinary outcomes even if you don't have to put in more hours. I think most people, you probably hear this all the time, everyone says, "Oh yeah, work hard and do more hours when you're young, whatever."

(00:21:26):
I'm like, what if you just did more per minute? Like quickly get through things. I think there's another unintuitive fact is that people who are really good can actually output high-quality collateral quickly. So take a person who is good and extremely good, the extremely good person can actually get a lot of output in a short amount of time, and the person who's good might take longer. I think there's a time variance there that people don't think about. So you can not drop the quality too much, but get the time down by 2X, 3X, right? Parkinson's Law of scale instead of, if I give you an hour to do something, a really good person can get a high-quality output in one hour.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:07):
I want to talk about how you create an org that operates this way, but specifically, you just mentioned pair programming. I know that's one of your favorite tools. Talk about why this is so powerful when you recommended... I think as an outside observer, it's like two engineers on the same code. Why wouldn't we do things half as fast? Talk about just why you're a big fan of pair programming specifically.

Farhan Thawar (00:22:30):
It is the most underutilized management tool in engineering, bar none. It is just not used as much as it could be. So pair programming, for those who don't know, it's two people on one computer. So two keyboards, two mics, two monitors, but one computer, they work together and if it's remote, they use it. You can use a tool like tuple, which we use, and you can just remotely be on one computer, and you're totally right. The famous tweet about pair programming is, wait a sec, we have two engineers on one computer, won't they write half as much code? And the answer is, oh, no, no, they'll write even less than that because it's not about lines of code. The throughput limiter is not hands-on keyboard. It's not like we're both sitting there and the limiter is like us trying to get through the keystrokes onto the screen.

(00:23:12):
The limiter is where is the good elegant solution? How do we think through the problem and build the right solution for the problem at hand? Tobi famously built a lot of Shopify paired programming, and what he would do is he would actually set a timer and him and the CTO Cody would pair program for one hour. And if they did not finish the problem in one hour, they would delete all the code and they would keep the tests and they would start over. And then what their thinking was, if we were not able to articulate and write the code for this feature in one hour, we must be on the wrong design. We must be building the wrong thing and so they delete all the code, kept the tests, and then wrote it again. And sometimes he'd be over by one minute and he would still delete the code and start over because his thinking was the right elegant solution should be able to be written in one hour.

(00:24:03):
And so pair programming, I mean, that's an extreme version of it, but even at Pivotal Labs, if your pair was sick that day and you wrote a bunch of code, the strong version is your pair would come in the next day, delete all the code that you wrote, and then you'd write it again the next day. And again, what better time to rewrite code than right after you've written it because you now know the problem domain? And by the way, it sounds like a waste of time. It sounds like I'm just deleting code but the reason is that code lives a long time. Code is a liability and the right solution, the usually shorter lines, more elegant solution tends to appear after you've done a bunch of pathfinding. And the only way to do that pathfinding is start and then delete and then start and be like, oh, no.

(00:24:47):
Now I know. Delete. And it's super hard to delete, by the way, because we're humans and we have this sunk cost fallacy, so it's hard to delete. But if you can do that, you will actually land upon a much, much better solution. And of course, pair programming has high, high rates of learning because you're just sitting beside... You're not only whether it's tuple or remote or directly, you learn keystrokes and you learn how somebody thinks about a problem. You go back and forth on the talking, and yes, you will write probably less code, but you will move faster along the path of delivering value for your customers than you would if you did it on your own. And there's all these studies that show happiness is higher, knowledge transfer is higher, less silos, intensity is higher, all the things. And at a price of 20% or something of what you would normally do.

(00:25:33):
The analogy I have is the underhanded free throw in basketball, statistically known to sink more baskets, but looks dumb and nobody does it. Literally, Shaquille O'Neal, I'm not that big a basketball fan, but I read this about Shaquille O'Neal, who's a Hall of Famer, and they said, "Why don't you throw underhand?" Because he was notoriously bad at free throws and he goes, "It looks dumb." Even though he's paid millions of dollars a year to do this thing. It looks dumb, doesn't want to do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:25:58):
I remember those Shaquille O'Neal years when he had a special free throw coach, and I remember them talking about this-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:00):
... When he hit a special free throw coach. And, I remember them talking about this and he's like, "No, I'm never going to do that."

Farhan Thawar (00:26:05):
"I'm never going to do it." Because it looks dumb. And by the way, go back to the beginning of the interview. I don't care what looks dumb or looking stupid, we're going to do this. And so, actually, I ran the biggest pair programming shop in the world.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:15):
On that note, so what percentage of shop Shopify do this? Is this how y'all operate?

Farhan Thawar (00:26:21):
Yeah. So, Shopify, I mentioned that Toby and Cody did this at the beginning of Shopify. And the cool thing about pair programming is, and in my old world at XtremeLabs is that we knew exactly what to build, because we were building mobile apps that were almost like contract manufacturing. We're like, "We have an iOS version. Can we build an Android version?" So, we quickly were able to say, "Here's the spec. Go quick." Shopify is such a different company, right? We are a pathfinding company. We are trying to find the right thing to build. And so, pair programming may or may not make sense all the time. Like Pivotal and Xtreme, we were doing 40 hours a week.

(00:26:54):
Shopify is much more of a four to eight hour a week pair programming culture, where you're gathering together on a problem and saying, "Hey, let's pair for half a day, or let's pair every Wednesday." And we use that tool in our arsenal to move quickly down a path. But a lot of other time is spent pathfinding and trying to figure out what to build, and trying to convince field be like, "Hey, we're going to go down this path. Oh, now I know exactly."

(00:27:16):
And sometimes, by the way, 18 months later, we've now figured out all the things and that's the time we should delete everything and start over. And, that's something that we will do at that point. And so, you don't want to be pair programming for 18 months. You want to be wayfinding and pathfinding. And then go, "I see the matrix. Let me just delete everything and now build it." Because the learning is what you're going for. We have all the learning, now let's write the code.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:27:39):
Got it. So it's basically, when the code, you're pretty sure this is correct and it's really important segments of the code base pair program.

Farhan Thawar (00:27:49):
Yeah. And then also we do a lot of pairing during an incident or a way to figure out together, work with somebody and say, "Hey, I'm not really sure and let's jump on a call together or jump on a tuple and go down the path." And say, "Let's figure out together what's going on."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:01):
I can't help but ask AI, how does that impact this way of working?

Farhan Thawar (00:28:06):
So, AI is super interesting. What's happening right now with an AI copilot like GitHub Copilot is it is your pair programmer. So, you now can feel like you're pairing actually without another human. You can pair with the AI. And so, what's happening too is that you're seeing people use Whisper, like they're talking to Cursor, and they're talking through Whisper to say, "Okay, let's build a new React component that does this." And they're talking and then it's building. "Oh no, that's not what I meant. I meant doing this." So you can actually not even have to type, just using voice, go back and forth with your pair programmer.

(00:28:35):
I would say, that's amazing. I would still contend take that experience and add two humans together. So you've got an AI copilot and humans, because what's happening is generating code. And the two humans can look and say, "Oh, I know what it's trying to do." And, either delete the code, because you have inspiration and write it yourself, or just take the suggestion and move it forward. But, I love today's world of AI copilots, because you never have to code loan on your own right? You never have to code alone. You can try a different language now, because the API and the syntax is much easier to pull forward. And so, all of those things are a win for engineering and a win for everybody who wants to build any software.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:14):
That makes a lot of sense. Basically, everyone's going to be a pair programmer-

Farhan Thawar (00:29:17):
Yes, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:18):
... In the future. Okay, I want to come back to what else you have done at Shopify to create intensity. And I think, again, it's important to highlight the intensity is meant to, "How do we get more done in the time we have and then go home?" Not just work all day every day, weekends kind of intensity.

Farhan Thawar (00:29:35):
Yeah. So we have a few things that we have going for us, right? So one, we have this tool called GSD, which stands for get shit done, which you've probably heard from maybe talking to other Shopify folk, which is this notion of weekly updates to the whole company on what's happening. Again, Parkinson's law at scale. If you ask people every week, they want to show progress every single week. So that's one way I talked about pair programming as well. The other thing we do as a company is, we used to have twice a year was our cadence, Black Friday, Cyber Monday, or we had an event in the summer. And now, we do six-week reviews. So, teams have this notion of every six weeks actually coming together and walking through the roadmap, the resourcing, and what they're working on with their immediate leadership, but then also, with Toby.

(00:30:18):
And so, what's cool about that, and by the way, it's a huge time investment, right? We all get into a room, it's happening tomorrow. So Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, a bunch of us will be in the office together and we're going to go through every project in the company, and we're going to talk about the project, the resourcing, how it's going, and we're going to make changes. And again, that creates intensity, because you want to show what has been done, what have you learned since the last six-week review. And, we find six weeks is a very good cadence, because it's short enough that you can remember the context and it's long enough... Six weeks is long enough, especially if you have, let's say, a team of a dozen engineers, you can do a lot. And not only that, you can do a lot in a day, but this is a check-in point.

(00:30:59):
And what I've noticed too with intensity is, let's say, we get a review and there's some feedback we get in that review. We don't wait until the next six-week review, right? The next day we are building things, we are iterating, we are tagging people. And then, by the next week's we're like, "Here's the trajectory." Right? Actually, I want to get that Elon shirt made, "What have you done this week?" Because, Parkinson's law is real. It sounds funny, but I keep bringing this up, but whatever time you allot to something will be the time it takes, right?

(00:31:26):
So, if you're doing something monumental, I don't know, you're doing a reorg or something, right? You can do it the slow way. "Let's sit down, and plan, and roll it out." And it's probably six months in most companies. Shopify, this is a week or two. You sit down, you're like, "Hey, this is the bones of it. Let's bring some more people and think." But then, it's going to start leaking. So we just launch it. Right? And, we do the same thing with lots of things. We just try to move more quickly and get out of the... We don't do change management, we just land it, and then go, "Hey everyone, it's a volatile company. This is what's happening. But this is how we get things done quickly." And then, move on with our lives.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:00):
Wow, there's so much there. I have been through the six-month reorgs. And, I think that context you just shared of, "We're at a volatile company, we're changing things. It's not going to be smooth, but we think this is for the best." It's just the culture of Shopify. It sounds like, "We want to keep moving fast. We know this isn't going to be the smoothest thing, but we just know this better to make the change at this point versus wait."

Farhan Thawar (00:32:25):
It's how Toby increased the resiliency in the company. He would walk around in the old days when we had a data center and just unplugged machines, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:32):
Chaos monkey.

Farhan Thawar (00:32:33):
Yeah, chaos monkey. You're right. But that actually works, because it just says, "Hey, by the way, shit's going to break. And so, let's be resilient to that." And so, same thing here. "Hey, by the way, someone's going to move your cheese. It's fine. We are here to create more entrepreneurs in the world. We're not here to have a six-month change management roadmap. And, that will just actually hurt the speed at which we can deliver value to merchants."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:52):
So, on all the things you shared, so there's weekly updates. So the weekly updates are each person shares what they're working on for the week. Is that the idea?

Farhan Thawar (00:32:59):
Each project.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:33:01):
Each project.

Farhan Thawar (00:33:02):
So, each project, it has an update, it might have a video of, "Here's the experience." It'll have a obviously a bunch of writing on what's changed since last time. We have a process called OK1 and OK2, which is like, OK1 is typically at the director level where they're like, "Okay, I'm aligned with the direction that this is going at." Or, "I'm not aligned." And they can make changes. Then, when it goes to OK2, it's typically the VP level of the area, who's now looking to say, "Okay. What you're working on actually aligns with the overall architecture. But by the way, have you looked at this context? Maybe you haven't seen this, this is happening, or the industry." And so, you're trying to align at that level. And then, again, like I mentioned, every six weeks we go through with Toby, and he's an intense guy himself.

(00:33:40):
And so, a lot of it is like, "Hey, why is this taking so long? Are we overthinking it? Are we not trying to move forward on this thing, because we're blocked on something? Is there some piece of infra?" Actually, I'll give you a good example. In one of the reviews from last time, there was an interesting AI problem we were trying to solve with LLMs that required us to have a very large output context window. And, most of the LLMs today have a very small output context window. But in the review, right, we have shared Slack channels with all the LLM folks, right? I messaged in the open AI channel, I messaged in the Gemini channel, whatever. And, within an hour we had increased the context on a bunch of major models and we were able to move forward through the thing, just because I asked.

(00:34:29):
And so, that's an example. It didn't take another six week review, but it increased the intensity, because the team was like, "Oh, we were blocked because we thought we had to now chunk up this data and do this thing because we had smaller output context and we thought we could do a big input context, but we'd have to do this caching." And, it was like this whole thing. I'm like, "Well, did we just ask them if we get bigger?" And then, they were like, "Oh, we don't have this as undocumented, but we'll just enable it right now for Shopify." And so, that created the intensity of the team to be like, "Oh, we can now quickly get unblocked." So that's the example of just moving quick and trying to just, again, ask a dumb question. I'm like, "This is probably not possible, but..." And then, they came back and said, "Oh yeah, we can do that."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:03):
That's a great example. And, as you're describing the ways that you create intensity and velocity within Shopify, it's interesting that what you're listing is a bunch of meetings and check ins, which to most people would feel like, "Why do we need so many..." There's all this like, "Less meetings." And I know you guys famously cancel all your meetings and that's a whole thing we can talk about. But, it's interesting that more check ins and regular check ins allow you to move faster. I imagine it's partly because it just makes sure you're not working on things that are unnecessary, and dumb, and not going to be used. And it's just continue to refine, these are actually the most important.

Farhan Thawar (00:35:38):
I mean, it's a combination of trust but verify, right? Because don't forget, the goal of the check-in is not for you to be like, "Ha, ha, I caught you not doing your work." It's not like the Dilbert boss, "Hey, did you do your thing?" Right? Even when I look at the Elon text, which is like, "Hey, what did you get done this week?" It wasn't to try to catch Parag in a, "You didn't do anything or you did a bunch of useless stuff." It was hopefully to pair on the problem, meaning, when I ask somebody, "Hey, did we move forward on this LLM project, because we now have this larger context window?" And then, they came back and said, "Oh, here's what we learned." So then, I can then look at the answer and say, "Oh, so now, have you thought of this? Have you tried..." It's a way to pair on the problem.

(00:36:18):
So, we have this word, everybody talks about micromanagement as a word, and we don't actually think it's a dirty word at Shopify, but the reason we don't think it's a dirty word is because it's not just, again, Dilbert boss saying, "Where did you do the thing?" It's like, "Hey, can I work on this problem with you? And if I work on this problem with you, I got to see where you are pretty often, and then give you advice, or you're going to share context with me, because I'm not in the work every day." To then come back and say, "Oh, based on what I know and what you know, can we move this in this direction? Maybe that's better for merchants."

(00:36:50):
I don't want to overuse the pairing paradigm, but it is really much like, "Can I pair with you?" And I learned this actually very early in my Shopify tenure, because Toby would have these one-on-ones with me and I'd be like, "Toby, you don't have to waste your time, man. You hired me. I got this." Well, he goes, "Oh, you misunderstand why you're here. We are here to work on problems together." And I was like, "Oh, I didn't even think..." I thought he hired me to take problems away. He hired me to work on problems with me. That's completely different than what I thought.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:18):
I love that. Okay. One thing you mentioned is meeting thing. For people that don't know what you all did with meetings, I think it might be worth just sharing that briefly, because it's awesome and something a lot of companies can learn from.

Farhan Thawar (00:37:28):
Yeah, sure. Actually, the funny story about the meeting Armageddon, is that, I was messaging Toby prior to me starting at Shopify about meeting Armageddon. And so, I actually think I had a little hand in him doing this before I got to Shopify. I was like, "Hey, have you seen..." I think it was Dropbox, "Have you seen a Dropbox is doing and Meetingageddon? And so, he was like, "This is super interesting." This is years before I started. So, I think it's funny that it ended up being a real thing. But here's what we do. Once a year at a random time, we will delete all recurring meetings that have more than two people, so not one-on- ones, and are internal people only, so not interviews or external partner meetings. And then, we have a two-week moratorium where you're not allowed to add a reoccurring meeting. You can have a regular meeting, but not a reoccurring meeting.

(00:38:11):
And the idea is that there's a lot of inertia behind a recurring meeting. It just always is there, and you know it's coming up, and it's hard to delete, because you're like, "Oh yeah, we talk about this thing every week." And so, what we do is we just do a meeting reset. And, I think, yeah, it's just called chaos monkey and the admins go in and just delete everything. Now what's cool about it is, it forces you to rethink, "Do we need a recurring meeting? Or do we just need one meeting? Or do we need a different cadence?" That's one thing. The other thing is it frees up so much crafter time, right?

(00:38:42):
One of the stats I track across engineering is how many hours are individual contributors in meetings per week? And we noticed that after we did... We did two things by the way. And I have a spicy second one for this, but the first one was we deleted meetings. And the second thing we did was we moved a lot of our Slack into Facebook workplace, which I'll talk about. Those are the only two things we did. And we saw a huge decrease in the amount of time crafters were in meetings. And then, we saw all kinds of other productivity enhancements, because they were able to have that flow time and work on things.

(00:39:12):
So, we're at something like three hours of meetings per week for an individual contributor at Shopify, which is phenomenal. Three hours a week is amazing. I think managers is not that bad. I think I tweeted this. I think it's six or seven hours per week. That's not bad at all, in order to get aligned. And then, all the rest of the time is work time.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:29):
And how many hours was it before Meetingageddon and Workplace?

Farhan Thawar (00:39:33):
Yeah, you're asking me a good question. I have to go look and see. But, it came down by something like 50 or 60%. It was something like five or six hours for individual contributors and came down to three. And then, the managers, I think it was 10 that came down to 6, something like that. But it was a huge difference. And the only two things, like I mentioned, were one was the Meetingageddon, the other one was like this, and I can talk about this. This is a-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:53):
Yes, let's talk about this.

Farhan Thawar (00:39:54):
... Yeah. So, I mean, I love Slack. It's the IM tool. Everybody uses it. But it can for sure cause distraction. And so, what we did was we moved all announcement information. So, anytime you're sending a status update or large group announcement, we moved all of that to Facebook Meta Workplace, like Facebook for work basically, which is now being deprecated. So, we'll have to figure that out. But, it just moved all this stuff to a ML feed that you can consume differently than you would Slack, because Slack is like I message you and you see an alert and all this stuff, versus Workplace is like, "Oh, I want to go and consume content from the company, and get updates, and share updates." And so, that reduced a lot of distraction as well. And so, I'd love to figure out what the next tool for us is, but it is probably something more like a river of information that I can dip my toe into, versus IM and chat everywhere.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:40:45):
That is super interesting. So, specifically, things that are just updates where you don't need a discussion, you almost want to discourage a discussion.

Farhan Thawar (00:40:50):
Yeah, I mean, it has the commenting, but it's not the same tool. And, by the way, Slack is amazing, we use it. It's just that for this thing, it wasn't working for us. And so, we wanted to move that somewhere else.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:41:03):
I feel like, the more I dig into the Shopify way of working, the more fun stuff I never expected emerges. I'm curious what else is going to emerge. So we've been talking about ways that y'all, and you specifically, have created intensity, especially in the engineering organization. And then, you've also shared just broadly Shopify. What else is on that list? What else have you found helps create more kilojoules per hour?

Farhan Thawar (00:41:24):
Yeah, so again, I think there's nothing, I would say again, start from the beginning, there's nothing more than pair programming, because literally you can't do anything else but be on your computer. So pair programming is the number one. I will say, the weekly cadence helps a lot, right, which you mentioned. Again, which is part of GSD, which is sharing the updates, and then the six-week reviews, that does a lot. On the other side, we also have a lot of metrics and alerts that help us see when potentially things might be happening in the system that can allow us to be like, "Hey, wait a sec, there's too many things going on of this type. We probably have to sit back and reset and figure out what's going on."

(00:41:56):
So one thing that happened, for example, was we started seeing that it was taking a lot of time to develop in our admin, like engineers at Shopify developing in the admin. So we called, what's called, a code yellow, which is before code red. But code yellow is this idea of like, "Hey, we're going to call a code yellow on the admin." We want to make sure that the developer experience inside Shopify is really good. It should be easy to start up the repo. It should be easy to make changes, it should be easy to see the changes. And so, those are the things that, again, we can create intensity, because this code yellow allows the champion to tap anyone on the shoulder and say, "Stop what you're doing and come help this thing." Which is an infrastructure layer thing. And by building out this infrastructure, it allows you to go fast. It takes longer to build infrastructure, but it makes you go fast forever afterwards, right?

(00:42:41):
I'll actually give you an example of one of these. So, we in 2020, 2021, the heyday of pandemic, obviously, there was a crypto summer again and crypto was going nuts. And we were sitting back and saying, "Wow, a lot of our merchants are now asking for NFT gating." NFT gating, which is, "If you have the token, you can now go into the storefront and see my products. You can see my prices and you can check it out, but only if you have the token." And, we were getting a lot of demand from merchants to be like, "We want to do this. We want to sell an NFT. And we want our buyers to have the NFT to have this great experience." And we're like, "We agree. We want you to be able to do whatever you want. And so, we want to build this for you too."

(00:43:18):
And, sitting with Toby, he's like, "You guys are thinking about it wrong." He goes, "How long would it take to build NFT gating?" I'm like, "I don't know. Two, three weeks." He goes, "Now, how long would it take to build a platform layer, which exposes APIs so anyone could build NFT gating in one hour?" I'm like, "I don't know. Two, three months." He goes, "Do that." He goes, "Because you don't know what they're going to build on top of the platform." NFT gating is one thing, one use case, but if you spend the time to build out the infrastructure layer, he calls it putting gas in the tank, if you put the gas in the tank, people could drive on that gas for a long time going forward. And so, he goes, "I always want you to think about..." And the key part was, "What can you build so anyone could build this in one hour?" Right?

(00:44:00):
So, he does this thing to us all the time where he goes, "Oh, this should only be..." He'll say it and people get the wrong thing. He'll say, "Oh, you could write this in a day." And what he means is, "What has to be true so that you could write this in a day? What infrastructure do you need?" And, he actually develops this way. He will write code against an API that doesn't exist, because he's like, "You know what should exist here? This API." He'll write the code, he'll go back and forth and refine the client on the server, and then he'll go, "This is correct, the correct client code. Now, let me go implement the server code."

(00:44:31):
And this is notion of building things as infrastructure that sound slower today, because it's going to take... It's two, three months, instead of two or three weeks. But after that, the things that people built on top, right, were so easy to build, there were so many more scenarios that were emerged. It's just a different way of thinking about software. And, it's intensity in a different way, it's intensity around building this infrastructure layer, which we want to build quickly, but takes two or three months, in this case, but then can get everyone building on top of our infra in a much, much quicker way. And of course, who knows what can flourish from there?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:06):
It's interesting and it makes sense that so much of the way you all think is about building the best possible platform, versus the, necessarily, best possible point solution for someone. And it also explains why you spend so much time in crafting really great code and pair programming, because again, it's a platform for other people to build stuff on. So, I think, a lot of this is very useful, especially for platform businesses.

Farhan Thawar (00:45:29):
No, exactly. And actually, you're making me think of a stat. So, last year, maybe a tangent, but I tweeted out that GitHub Copilot has written over 1 million lines of code for Shopify. And people are like, "Oh my god." And it got picked up. And everyone's talking about it. And I go, "I don't know why is everybody getting so crazy, because what I want to see is GitHub Copilot deleting 1 million lines of code." That's when you know we're actually at this point where this is close to an engineer. Right? And so, we famously have deleted millions of lines of code this year, because we were trying to focus on, again, the sunk cost and rebuilding things elegantly, or you don't need this anymore and rebuilding. And I even tweeted out, I think someone said, "Oh, Shopify is in the top 10 Ruby code bases in the world." And I said, "I never want to see us on this list again." We shouldn't be gunning for number one, we should be gunning for number 100, right? We want to be not on this list. Right? Someone else can take the crown.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:22):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta. When it comes to ensuring your company has top-notch security practices, things get complicated fast. Now, you can assess risk, secure the trust of your customers, and automate compliance for SOC 2, ISO 7001, HIPAA and more with a single platform, Vanta. Vanta's market leading trust management platform helps you monitor compliance, alongside reporting and tracking risk. Plus, you can save hours by completing security questionnaires with Vanta AI. Join thousands of global companies that use Vanta to automate evidence collection, unify risk management, and streamline security reviews. Get $1,000 off Vanta when you go to Vanta.com/lenny. That's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny. Wait, talk about more about this. So, there's been a drive to delete code and simplify. What's behind that? What's going on there?

Farhan Thawar (00:47:22):
Yeah, so there's a few things, right? One is, the more context you can fit in your head around a code base. And you can never really fit all of Shopify in your head, because it's a big complicated set of tools we give to merchants. But, the more you can simplify, the much easier everything becomes, resiliency, performance, reliability, maintainability, all the illities become much, much, much easier when the code base is simple. Now, all you need really is the mandate of like, "Oh, well, let's look at this code. And, if I could start this today, would I really build this thing? Or do I now have enough domain expertise to say, 'Oh no, this is the right solution?' So can I delete start over and build this more easily?" And now, everything else becomes easy to build on top of.

(00:48:04):
And so, routinely, we have a delete code club, we have hack days, which happens two or three times a year, where there's always one team that is focused on deleting code. They even have a manual, "Here's how to find things to delete." And, it's amazing. We almost always delete. I don't know if this is good or bad. We can always almost find a million plus lines of code delete, which is insane. But, at the same time, I applaud the teams for going after the cruft and the code base. And everything gets easier, right? Codelets loads faster. It's easier to understand.

(00:48:34):
This is why when I look at GitHub stats, you shouldn't really look at... I think Google put out and said, "Oh, 25% of all code is now written by AI." I'm like, "Where's the delete? Where is the 25% of all code is deleted by AI?" Right? This is where we have to start thinking about it. Because, the right code is never the volumous lines of code metric. It's always something else. It's always elegance. And that's where we have to think about. So, it is something that, as part of us being long-term infrastructure thinking, we really do care about that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:49:06):
I love this, in part, because it connects to the topic we're talking about, which is speed, velocity, intensity, smaller code base, cleaner, better code base allows you to move faster. I used to be an engineer actually. But, both my engineering brain and my PM brain, I love the idea of killing stuff that's useless, fixing, making code cleaner, and better, and more durable. In reality, very hard for companies to prioritize this thing. Is there anything you found that helps you do that? You mentioned hack days and weeks are one part of that. Probably helps that Toby's an engineer and he understands the value of this stuff. But I guess, for folks that want to do this more, any advice?

Farhan Thawar (00:49:42):
Yeah. So actually, when we're building something, we think of it in one of three buckets. We're like, "Are you building an experiment, a feature, or infrastructure?" And, once you bucket things, you can say, "Oh, it's an experiment." You're like, "Cool. This is not infra. This is like, we're trying something to learn." And, by the way, that might turn into an experiment or infra, but it starts off as an experiment. Now, if you're building a feature, a feature is basically you're taking advantage of an existing piece of infra, right? So, token gating is the example I gave. If you could now build that in one hour, you would probably say, "Oh, we have the right infra below it."

(00:50:14):
But if you did what Toby does, which is, he's like, "Here's the infra I wish existed. Here's the feature. The feature might be quick to build, but now I have to go and build the infra." You're now slotting yourself into infra land, which is like, that could take longer, but you're now enabling it for a bunch of use cases. You don't have to think about it at once, because you may have people using your API in a different way.

(00:50:32):
So, I think you have to slot yourself. Now, how do people get into this mode? It is super, super hard. And, I would say, Toby is the secret sauce here, because he pushes us to think about things as infra almost all the time. I mean, one of the things that annoys me the most probably is that I'll always come to him and say, "Hey, we can do A or B." And he looks at me and he goes, "You know what I'm going to say, right?" I'm like, "You're going to say go back and generate more options." Because he doesn't like those. "I don't like A or B. Come back when you have something else." Right? Actually, maybe I'll tell you a little anecdote. He has a story where he says, "There are unlimited amount of wrong options for any problem. There's probably 10,000 right options, but everybody stops at the first right one, instead of what you should be spending all your time on, because the options that don't work, you're not going to spend time on. But you have to figure out which of the 10,000 options is the right one and spend time in what are all these right options? Don't just stop at the first one."

(00:51:24):
And so, when I come to and say, "A or B." I'm picking two of the 10,000. And he's like, "That's not what I... Go back and generate more options, because those are not the optimal ones." So, he is quite the philosopher on these things. And it does really change the way the company works, because he'll push you on these things. And then, we over time learn to spot the same patterns. And I learned to push my team on infra, and deleting code, and making things simple, because by the way, who doesn't want to get free stuff? Right? Free performance, free, easy to navigate code base, free maintainability, free resiliency,, because now, we went and did the hard work of deleting. It is hard. But that goes back to the beginning, right? Choose the hard thing. Don't just build the feature-

Farhan Thawar (00:52:01):
The beginning, right? Choose the hard thing. Don't just build the feature, go make the feature easy to build.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:06):
I feel like there's just more and more good stuff. What else is there that might be helpful to folks while you're thinking about it? And interesting, I was reading your tweet where you shared a lot of this advice, and you mentioned this briefly, but I think it's important with pair programming, one of the benefits is there's no multitasking. You're not checking Twitter, Slack while you're working because you're there being watched. And I could see why that is more productive just innately.

Farhan Thawar (00:52:31):
Oh no, for sure. Again, like underhand or free throws not only looks dumb, it feels dumb. People don't... They feel like they're wasting time sitting beside somebody and being like, "Well, I could be on my computer doing this thing." But together they are building a machine. Do you ever read the Undoing Project, which is about Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, the famous philosopher.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:52:54):
By Michael Lewis, I think.

Farhan Thawar (00:52:56):
Behavioral economist. Michael Lewis. Exactly. And he said the famous line was "Alone, we're okay, but together, we're a genius." Right? That's a pair programmer. That's like two people. You're like, "Ah, we're okay. But together, we're a genius." And that's exactly what pair programming is. And hopefully me plus an LLM is a genius as well, but that's the genesis of that thinking. So I would say another thing that helps us create intensity is demo culture. So as part of the GSD updates, hopefully we encourage people to share high fidelity updates, which is not just imagery, but actually a demo. One of the things that can go wrong with just their screenshots is you don't really get the full experience. You can't tell how slow things are or whatever, but with a demo, so you can put a link. We have this tool called Spin, which is an internal development environment like a cloud dev environment where you can say, "Hey, click here to try this on Spin, and then you can try it and you can see how it works."

(00:53:52):
Or they say, "Turn on a beta flag in your own store and then try it." And so this short circuits a lot of misunderstandings, because you're like "I'm going to try it." And you're not waiting until the end, especially with a beta flag. You're like, "Hey, it's in my store. I just realized that I went in and now this page takes 20 seconds to load. Is that what you expect?" You're like, "Oh, we didn't find this use case." You're going to learn that much more quickly.

(00:54:13):
And that creates, again, intensity on the fidelity of the feedback you're getting because famously, some of our PM team will create a friction log. They'll be like, "I am walking.." They'll just create a screen share, create a video and go, "I'm walking through. I turn on the beta flag, I'm walking through this experience. Here's my feedback on the experience." And you're getting this high fidelity throughput coming back to you that you're like, "Okay, let's fix these things for next week's iteration and then share another beta flag and say, 'Okay, try it now. Try it now. Try it now.'" And so you're not debating about status reports, you're kind of debating about the experience.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:54:46):
So I'm trying to think broadly all the things you've shared, kind of how they fit together that allow you to move this fast. And I just looked up a few stats to give people a sense of just the size of the company today and how successful it has been as they hear the stuff we're talking about. So you guys are about 11,000 employees, something like that according to the Googles. And you're hitting not necessarily all-time highs on market cap because COVID gave you guys a big boost for a while, but you're kind of coming back to this insane valuation that you all had during COVID. So it's essentially all-time highs at a 10,000 plus person company moving really fast, shipping constantly. People love the product. And it feels like one key of what you're describing is essentially this operating rhythm that creates these check-ins that keep people moving and focused on the right sorts of tools and getting them quick feedback if they're moving in the wrong direction.

Farhan Thawar (00:55:42):
And having the leaders pair with those people on those problems, not just checking in, but actually pairing with them on the problems that they're facing. So you get both the crafters who are working on the stuff and the leaders who may have broader context working together to kind of unblock.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:57):
And it's so interesting that it's like, again, people often are often like, "We don't need meetings. Get rid of all the meetings." You guys do that, but also, there's a lot of power in strategic meetings and check-ins. Another kind of bucket is just the engineering environment, engineers working with engineers, pair programming, things like that. There's a tool you mentioned for pair programming, Tuple, I think.

Farhan Thawar (00:56:17):
Tuple. Yeah. It's funny because we use it exclusively, but we actually have this line internally, we call it, Shopify should be a crafters' paradise. It should be the place where crafters come to practice their craft and get better at their craft. Obviously, resonates from a lot of the engineering crafters, but it's not only engineering, it's UX and PM and ML, all the places where you'd want those people to actually have a great experience. We want them to come to Shopify because we believe this is the best place for that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:46):
I love it. I just wrote a note down of just how you set up your teams for success. Oh, just avoid distractions. So I think the pair programming helps the workspace, workplace shift from Slack helps. I think you're also very firm on their working hours. You basically don't let...

Farhan Thawar (00:56:46):
No.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:03):
No. Okay. [inaudible 00:57:04]

Farhan Thawar (00:57:04):
No, not really. Yeah. We're not super firm on working hours from that perspective, but we do have a lot of people on East Coast time zones. A lot of stuff happens then, but we do have people all over the world. But I did mention we do have the check-ins and the six-week reviews on the cadence. So that six week cycle does give you a little bit of the, what did you get done and are you blocked mentality. And you can expect coming in a couple of times and being like, "Hey, we didn't get a lot done being unblocked." For you to change your approach to go, "Okay, I don't want to go to another review where we didn't get a lot done." So what am I doing this time to make sure we unlock a lot of progress? And that check-in can give you that ammo to be like, "Let's do this this time."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:44):
And you're also remote first as a company.

Farhan Thawar (00:57:46):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:46):
Which I think is especially cool. Now a lot of companies are going back to not remote. You guys are staying remote. Why do you guys decide to do that? What have you seen as a big benefit of that?

Farhan Thawar (00:57:55):
Yeah, so we have this remote, so I like to call it 90% remote or 95% remote because we have these intentional IRL experiences. So every summer, we just started last year. Sorry, this year. We're doing this thing called Shopify Summit where we bring the whole company together, get together and it's a combination of talks plus hack days and it's a come together experience like food and parties and bands. And it's a super fun way to re-energize and rebuild your trust battery over time. And then we have this thing called bursts, which is, "Hey, you want to work on a problem? You need to prototype, you need to hack." People can just say, "Hey, I'm starting a burst. We're going to have five people. We're all going to go to Ottawa or Toronto or Montreal or somewhere else and we're going to talk about this problem and get together."

(00:58:38):
And so a combination of those two things mean throughout the year, you can recharge. We have the trust battery notion, which is how much trust can you have between people and it can deplete over time if you're remote. So then we have offices which are like, come in if you want. Like I mentioned, I come in once a week and now Toby moved to Toronto, so now I'm in three days a week. But it's like if you want to come in, you don't have to, right? Today, I work from home, but tomorrow, I'm going in. And that allows you, again, to have those random interactions and allow you to feel like, yeah, we're 90 plus percent remote. But I would say the main reason is we want to hire the best people in the world and those people can be anywhere and just happens to be that not all of them are near an office.

(00:59:20):
But again, with the bursting, here's a good example. For Black Friday, Cyber Monday, I encouraged all engineering leadership to come to Toronto. We're all going to be in the office watching the graphs. And then for hack days, I try to get people to go to the ports, which we have four of them, Toronto, Montreal, Ottawa, and New York, which again are come in if you want, but then get that IRL. And so it's kind of a little bit of a combo. I wouldn't call it hybrid though because you don't really have every Friday you come in or don't come in. It's more like, come in if you want.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:59:48):
There's so many things to talk about. This trust battery metaphor by the way is awesome. I've learned to use it also. And again, it's just basically everyone, your trust with someone is like, think of it as a battery that can deplete and grow and you should try to charge it up when you can and then use that charge over time.

Farhan Thawar (01:00:06):
And it can be strategic by the way. I've seen people use it as a... I'm pretty sure Toby says he starts everyone at 50% and then he gets to know you. And then I've seen people use it as the opposite, saying, "Hey, look, this team is hard charging. I'm going to start you at a hundred. Assume that you already have high trust, do the things, and only if you are doing things that are off alignment, does your trust battery deplete." So I've seen people use it, the terminology as a shortcut way to figure out how to work with somebody.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:30):
I love just how first principles you all are, and there are so many things are so unique to how you operate and clearly it's working. And so I feel like we just keep going on and on. I want to talk about hiring. I know you have some pretty unique perspectives on how to hire people that are awesome, but also, hire them quickly. But before we get there, is there anything else that you think might be really valuable to share in terms of intensity, velocity, moving fast?

Farhan Thawar (01:00:53):
I think the personality of the leadership team is quite intense. We have a lot of founders on the exec team, which are impatient, intense people by design. But even some of the non-founders are just accomplished people who tend to be pretty, we all have this attitude of impatience, and so maybe, I don't even know if that's a learned skill you can learn or if it just comes along with your personality, like genetics. But we typically, even at the leadership team, for example, we try to do, here's my weekly thread of all the things that are going on so that we can not only share, but also show progress on things. And then someone can jump in and say, "Oh, this thing you're doing, it relates to my thing that I'm doing over here." It creates this notion of, there's a lot going on all the time and we want to keep the vibes, keep the energy high. So a lot of high energy intense people.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:45):
It reminds me while I was at Airbnb, it felt like no matter how well things are going, it always felt like Brian especially is just pedal to the metal. No matter how well things are going, it's not going well enough. How do we go faster? How do we do more?

Farhan Thawar (01:02:00):
Well, I would actually go further. I think if you don't have two or three big projects that are on fire, you're probably not pushing hard enough because you're not really trying things that are outside of your... If everything's going well, are you really taking the risks you need to be taking? So I think you have to over-rotate a bit and there should be a few things on fire at all times, not because you should create that, but it should just happen because you're stretching into new things that potentially or you're going faster than you should have, or there's a new leader you've counted on early because all these things that should create this thing of it might work. And so you want to have a little bit of chaos at the edge.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:39):
I love that. And it may sound stressful and why would I want that? Why would I want to work with chaos and fires everywhere? But in reality, if you don't, your business is unlikely to become incredibly successful and that is even more stressful and painful.

Farhan Thawar (01:02:55):
Correct. Yeah, it's like the opposite, right? It's like this idea of people feel like the comfort gives you stability, and really the uncomfort gives you stability because now you're constantly learning and that makes you more robust against things that could come across.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:11):
Choosing the harder path, some might say. Okay, let's talk about hiring. You have some really interesting takes on hiring. One that I've heard about is that you don't like the interview process. You kind of like to prefer not to interview and do something instead. Talk about that.

Farhan Thawar (01:03:28):
Yeah. So throughout my career, what I've noticed is that, and I'm sure everybody, this is a dirty little secret, right? Interviews are not a good predictor of performance. We know this. We know this from studies. We know this. Everybody at their company knows this, where somebody interviewed well, wasn't as good in the job or the opposite, didn't interview well and then came in and was phenomenal. One example I have from my startup right before we came to Shopify was I hired two people for machine learning. One was a PhD, taught at the university, was like, oh my god, no brainer, was also recommended by an employee. We're like, "Oh my god, this person's going to be great." The other person was a dude I met at the coffee shop who had never had a software job but was just so interested in machine learning and person A, we let go within a few weeks because not a fit for our culture.

(01:04:12):
And person B was at our startup and is still at Shopify today and is a phenomenal machine learning engineer who literally at our Christmas party was like, "This is my first software job." We're like, "How?" It was just so cute. And we gave them both the shot. The key was I didn't use the resume in either way to bias. We brought them both in. We said, "Here's the environment." It was all pair programming at my startup. And so they pair program, and actually as an aside, I really believe in pair programming when I made people work in pair programming with my own money. I paid for two people to be on one computer. So that's how you know...

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:50):
Less than half the code.

Farhan Thawar (01:04:51):
Yeah, exactly. Right. Less than half the code. But anyway, so pairing. And it was pretty clear after just a few weeks, I would say let's say up to three months is the amount of time I give people, that person A wasn't going to work out than person B was. So what I really like to do is use this race car analogy. If I told you, "Hey, I want to go hire the best race car driver," there's not really that many questions you could ask them except for put them in the car. And so the same thing happens with us is that of course, we have to do interviews, but we do really spend time in the 30, 60, 90 days to make sure that the thing that they are bringing actually lines up with what we need at Shopify. And you should also be transparent with people because if it's not a fit, it's actually good for them and you to figure that out as quickly as possible because they could be amazing somewhere else.

(01:05:39):
We mentioned the chaotic environment and fast moving environment Shopify is, that's not for everyone, but that's okay, right? We're not looking for... We've talked about that we want to be as the best 10,000 person company in the world. We're not looking for millions of people. We just need the best 10,000. And so if it's not a fit, it's in your interest and our interest to figure that out quickly so that you can go somewhere where you will be amazing and for us to have the people who will be amazing at Shopify. And so job trials, I'm a huge fan of, which leads me to intern programs, what a great interview process because you now have real work product from somebody for four months. They get to see what it's like to be at Shopify for four months. We get to see what it's like for them to be at Shopify for four months, and that can turn into a full-time gig.

(01:06:21):
And that's a great interview process because you literally know exactly. You don't have to... I'll give you a funny example. I think I've heard a company where, "Oh, we have an intern process and then afterwards, we interview them for full-time." I'm like, "What are you going to learn from let's say even eight hours of interviews that you're not going to have learned from four months of real work experience?" And so there's just things like that. You just got to look at the work product. And so I'm a big fan of job trials, and in my previous companies, like you mentioned, I almost didn't interview anybody. I almost just said, "Come in and work." And it allowed us... We had a much higher in the first 90 days, like 20% attrition before 90 days because it just didn't work out. But those after 90 days, we had less than 1% attrition because they knew exactly what they're getting into and we knew exactly how they were going to fit.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:04):
So in terms of the hiring process, you're still at Shopify. You're interviewing people, they're doing technical evaluations, things like that. But it sounds like there's a very strong setting of expectations. "We will hire you, but we'll actually clarify if this is a good fit in the first 30, 60, 90 days and we're going to do... We may let you go and there's a good chance we may let you go." Is that just the way you set things up?

Farhan Thawar (01:07:27):
Yeah, I think the way to think about, it's more like we want to make the interview process as close to the real job as possible because by doing that, we can likely assess the skills that you have in your interview closer to what's happening in the job. So that's one. Two, we have this interview step called the life story where we try to figure out if, are all the experiences you've had up until now actually going to be... Does it show that you are a curious person with range? Because if it does, that's likely more of someone who's going to be a fit. I had this famous line from somebody who said, "You know what I don't like about resumes?" I'm like, "What?" They go, "It tells you what you did, but it doesn't tell you why you did those things."

(01:08:10):
And it's such an interesting insight. Your resume should be a why, like why did you go from this company to this? That's the interesting part. Not that you are a PM at Microsoft and a PM at Stripe. It's like, why did you switch from Stripe to Microsoft? There's something interesting there. And so the life story is trying to pull that out. It's like, why did you make the decisions? What did you do in your past that was interesting? Are you curious? I always thought... I read this great book, Range by David Epstein. That book was maybe one of the hardest books for me to read in my life because every page I was like, "I don't believe it." I kept thinking I was a specialist. I kept turning the page going, "I don't like this data that keeps showing that generalists are better." And then by the end, I realized that I'm a generalist. It took me so long to realize, and funny for me because I ended up redesigning the compensation system for Shopify, even though I'm an engineer.

(01:08:56):
So I still thought of myself as an engineer through and through, even though I work on recruiting and HR and all these other things. But I think that that's what we're trying to tease. And then yes, in that first period, we actually have a survey that goes over Slack that says, "Hey, how happy are you with the person that you hired?" And that should, in conversation with the person, you should give them the feedback to figure out, "Hey, are there things you need to adjust to better fit in and make sure the expectations are set up?" But then also, together with the person, figure out, "Hey, if you're not feeling this, let's find you either a different role in the company or somewhere else because we want the people here to have high impact." But that person should have high impact somewhere, could be at Shopify, could be in the same role, could be in a different role, could be at a different company. But that's a good thing for everybody.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:09:41):
And then do you actually do work trials with new engineering hires, or is that something you aspire to do?

Farhan Thawar (01:09:46):
Yeah, I would love to do it. It's hard to do with the volume resumes we get, but we do do it at scale with the internship program. So like 2025, we're going to hire a thousand interns, and that is going to give me a thousand job trials to pick the top X percent of those to come to Shopify full time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:10:03):
So just to double-click on that, so you're hiring a thousand interns over the course of the year. That's a lot. And the idea there is these folks are actually useful building useful things, and it's an interview process for the internship.

Farhan Thawar (01:10:17):
Yeah, I think it's two things. One is some people look at an internship program as community service. Let's give back to the community. Let's hire early talent. And I'm like, "Hold on a sec. Are you telling me I could hire a thousand people over the year?" And they will come to work with an LLM and a brain because they're growing up in the age of AI. They will be useful to us because they come from a different generation and they have, in our case in commerce, they have a different experience about shopping and AI and bots and chat and voice and all these things. They'll be useful to us. We'll teach them some stuff as well. And then together we can decide if they might end up going somewhere else, in which case, we have the Shopify imprint on them going to whatever other company, which is I think a positive, or they might stay at Shopify and be useful over a longer period.

(01:11:02):
It seems like win, win, win. The other thing that was cool is after I did that tweet, a bunch of other CTOs messaged me and said, "Hey, we're going to hire 1,001 interns to beat you guys." And I'm like, "Great." Just from that one tweet, if I can get the early talent ecosystem restarted here after a really tough last few years and layoffs, it's great for everybody because now they're realizing that they also realize that these people are super valuable and they bring together a completely different set of skills. And by the way, here's a secret in pair programming, interns will always be more intense than the full-time. And so that also helps the flywheel of intensity go for it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:11:40):
It all just keeps coming back. Did the internship program emerge out of this co-op system that Canadian schools have and a Waterloo has a big co-op program?

Farhan Thawar (01:11:49):
Yeah, I went to Waterloo. And so yeah, hint, hint. So I went to Waterloo and I did co-op and I did intern programs there. It was amazing. What a great experience, because what ends up happening is you leave Waterloo with your degree, but also with two years of experience because I did six four-month work terms, 24 months, and you end up walking. I think one of the big parts of it is just interview skills because I interviewed for 10 plus jobs every four months, and I did that six times. And so you come out having done lots... You have a lot of interview experience, but you also have work experience. And so just taking that to the next level, Shopify has always had interns. And what I felt like we needed to do was, again, restart this notion of early talent in the ecosystem. I would say one or two big differences with our intern program.

(01:12:36):
One is we're making them come in three days a week versus full remote. And the reason for that is, and we're doing it just in three offices right now in Montreal, Toronto and Ottawa. And the reason for that is because we want them to have a cohort because early talent is different than you and I who've been in the industry. We worked in office, we worked out of office. We're more comfortable with navigating partnership discussions and talking to people in different companies. But these people have not. They may have never worked anywhere.

(01:13:02):
And so to not have the IRL component would do them a disservice. And so we specifically made it in those ports and the people are traveling by the way, they're moving to Montreal to do the internship. It's great. And then if you're a mentor or manager for one of the interns, you have to at least see them like IRL once a month. So we're kind of making these experiences. And of course, they'll have a cohort of dozens of people that will be with them along the way. And so we think that'll just make their experience better. And of course, nothing like tapping someone on the shoulder and be like, "Have you seen this era before?" And so it's easier in an early talent situation. And then of course over time, if they become full-time, they can still come to the office. It's come if you want, but they can also go full remote.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:39):
That is amazing. For folks that don't know anything about these co-op programs briefly, it's just basically while you're in school, before you graduated, during the summer, you go work at a company.

Farhan Thawar (01:13:39):
No.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:13:48):
Oh, during the year. Okay.

Farhan Thawar (01:13:50):
Yeah, it's during the year. So what happens at Waterloo is, what I did was I did eight months of school at the beginning. So two terms. My first co-op term was summer, but then it was work, school, work, school, alternating for the whole rest of my time at Waterloo.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:02):
It's like semesters alternating.

Farhan Thawar (01:14:03):
Exactly. So every four months I did either school term or work time. So I was doing work in January sometimes and September sometimes. And it was super good because again, it also allowed me to be super intense at school for four months and then go to super intense work experience for four months. But yeah, it's a model that... I was just at Waterloo this week doing a talk, so I love that symbiotic relationship between Waterloo and the employers, by the way, not just Waterloo. Lots of schools do a summer program, UFT and others, lots of schools in the states.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:14:32):
Fun fact. So total tangent, I had a startup called Local Mine, started it in Montreal of all places. I'm not Canadian, but moved there for various reasons. It was awesome. And our first hire was actually from the co-op program. I don't know if it was Waterloo, his name is Nick Adams. And he applied. Just he saw our job posting, I think, and were like, "What is a co-op?" And he came to work and then he went back to school, and then we hired him, and then he ended up at Airbnb when we got a card.

Farhan Thawar (01:14:59):
There you go. So for us, actually, when I did my startup Helpful, I had one or two engineers, and then I actually literally just hired four interns because you hired them in February for May. And because I was doing pair programming, I had to make sure I had four full times by then. So I hired the interns in anticipation of having the full times. And I literally had, I think I was off by one week, so one intern had no pair for a week, but then after that in May, I had four full times, four interns, and then they paired the whole time.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:31):
What a journey. I want to talk about just one other topic real quick and then we'll wrap this up. And it's around XtremeLabs. So there's a bunch of stuff here. It feels like it's just like this tech mafia of Canada that a lot of incredible people emerged out of, and there's a whole bunch of stuff we can talk about. One fact I heard while you were there is you had a hundred reports, direct reports that reported to you.

Farhan Thawar (01:15:56):
A 120.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:15:57):
120 direct reports feels like a complete nightmare to me. Tell me why you decided to do that, if you'd recommend that for other people.

Farhan Thawar (01:16:05):
Yeah, so what ended up happening there was we started off small. It was 10 people. When I got to XtremeLabs, I wasn't the founder, but I was very early on and I just had everyone report to me. And then as we grew, I just kept having those people report to me and I was trying to figure out, we talked about crafters and crafters paradise, this idea of people don't really... Their managers are useful, but I was trying to figure out could I solve the problems that they needed their manager for in other ways? So for example, what should I be working on? I was like, "Okay, well, we have product backlogs" or "I'm blocked on something," or "I need feedback on the product I'm building," or "I'm stuck on this technical problem." I tried to figure out ways to not have managers be the answers to those questions.

(01:16:48):
I'm like, "There should be another answer." And so pair programming really helps you get unblocked quickly because you have another person that you can bounce technical ideas off of. Having a product backlog can tell you what to work on. We had demos every week, demos internally, and then we had demos with the clients every week because we were a contract manufacturing for mobile. That gave them feedback on whether they were going in the right direction. We had set working hours, which made things super intense in the office. This is again like 2009 to 2013. So all these things didn't really need a manager. And what I realized was what the unblocking thing needed a manager. I'm blocked on this. Well, I said, okay, if... I had all these directors. I did two things famously. One, I had a lot of direct reports, and two, I did not do any scheduled one-on-ones because you can't have 120 direct reports and do a scheduled one-on-ones because you're never doing anything but one-on-ones.

(01:17:31):
So I said, "I'm going to be around a lot because I don't have a lot of one-on-ones. So we can do unscheduled one-on-ones." And what that means is if you are blocked, actually there's a famous picture where I had this weird cube desk where it was like a circle almost in the middle of the whole floor of engineers. And I was always there because I wasn't in a lot of meetings and people that were blocked, they could just come up to me. Actually, one cool thing about pair programming IRL is you can look across and just see if it's working or not. Because if two people are intensely on the computer, you know it's working. If one person is laying back or you're like, "It's not working," so you can just walk up to-

Farhan Thawar (01:18:00):
It's working if one person is laying back or you're like, it's not working. So you could just walk up to them and be like, "What's happening?" But they would come and ask me questions and I can unlock them. Like, hey, we're blocked on this. We don't have this API. We need money for this machine, whatever. And so the unscheduled one-on-ones ended up being a real clarifying thing for me. Because I did scheduled one-on-ones my whole career and I realized after leaving Microsoft for three years, I'm like, where are all those one-on-ones useful once a week for three years, right? A hundred and fifty one-on-ones.

(01:18:26):
So the unscheduled ones were, though. I was like, when I knocked on my manager's door and said, "I have this problem, those were important." So that's what I created at Xtreme. And the 120 directors, it just grew over time. I just didn't think I needed managers. So I was like, let me unblock these people on another way. And we came up with other things to systems to unblock them that didn't require a manager. And I just also had a good memory. I knew exactly everyone's skills and compensation. I knew all that off the top of my head, so that helps.

(01:18:54):
The thing that I broke was actually, this is Chamath. He came in and became our biggest investors. He's obviously is a smart guy, but he said the right thing, which is not, this can never work, because then I would go into defense mode and explain to him why it would work. He just said to me, I'm not going to debate with you whether this works or not, but will it work at 400 people? And I said, probably not. He said, okay, so let's change it.

(01:19:16):
And so we did then ended up putting a little bit more of a structure, but I made a few people directors and I forced them to have 40 direct reports each. I said, we're just going to make it still pretty flat. And then that did end up working, because it still allowed them to use the system to unblock people versus having to do a one-on-one every week, or having to talk about things that potentially a system could unblock. And so I tried to figure out ways to systematize things.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:19:45):
I love it. Just another example of doing things differently, not necessarily just, here's how it's done and I'm going to do it that way and experimenting with it. Even if you knew, okay, maybe long term this isn't the way it's going to operate. I imagine at Shopify you don't have 120 reports.

Farhan Thawar (01:19:58):
No, we have fourteen or something. We do have these guardrails where I think we say, Hey, in engineering you should have between eight and 20. There are definitely people who have more and people who have less. But we do try to keep things as flat as possible, because we do believe that it doesn't make sense to have three people reporting to and then to somebody, and then they only have three people. You just make a very deep hierarchy. We actually do see, by the way, the farther you are from Toby, we can see things in the survey results. The alignment gets out of whack, and so you do actually see that you want to be closer, you want to have a flatter org in general, and that can be achieved by just having more direct reports per level.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:20:39):
Makes sense. Okay, final question before we get to our very exciting lightning round. We have this recurring segments that I call Fail Corner where generally people come on these podcasts, they share all their successes. Here's all the things that I've done, right. Here's all the big wins. And everyone feels like, oh man, I wish I was always successful people. When in reality, everyone that comes on has failed many times. Is there a story of a failure in your career that you could share that helps people see that even folks like you fail, and maybe what you learned from that experience?

Farhan Thawar (01:21:10):
I have a few. I'll say one thing by the way, because I think I read this in Tim Ferriss's book or in the podcast where he said, create a failure resume and write everything down. And I would not recommend doing this because I did this and I got super... I'm like a high energy happy guy. I wrote down, I have a note on my phone called Failure Resume, and I wrote down all the times I failed and it is depressing. So I would not encourage people to do that, but I'm happy to tell you about a few instances.

(01:21:33):
So well, one is actually I've been laid off twice and people would not expect like, oh, I'm doing this thing and I've been laid off twice. And I think in both times it was the right thing, it was the right thing for the company, the right thing for me.

(01:21:45):
And I kind of used that experience as a way to reevaluate and eventually came out with my framework of how I want to spend time. But that's maybe a different story.

(01:21:54):
I'll tell you about one at Shopify, the first week that I started, 2019, we were rebuilding our point of sale system, which now does billions of dollars of GMB. But back then we were like, well, let's rebuild it with a new UX and a new technology platform. And it was my first week and I'm the mobile guy, coming from Extreme Labs. They're like, should we build this in React Native, or should we build this natively on the mobile platforms? And so I went through this evaluation, spent a lot of time, blah, blah, blah, and I came back with a hedged solution, which is kind of dumb. I said, let's do iOS and Swift and let's do Android in React Native. And the reason I said that was I said, I want to learn about React Native and I think Android's the harder platform, so let's build that in React Native, but iOS on Swift because that guarantees us a product in market. And we didn't have any React Native apps in market at the time. A year later we launched the iOS version and it was a huge success. And we then spent another six months building the React Native version for Android and everything else. And we realized pretty quickly that React Native was the platform for the future. We were like, oh my God, this will allow us to have one platform. You could run it on the web as well, and we could use the React engineers from the web to work on it. It was a clear winner. By then, we had also launched a shop app, which is React Native.

(01:23:11):
And so we learned a lot about this. And I went back and I said, hey everybody, I made a huge mistake. We just spent a year building this thing. It's in market, but we're going to have to rewrite. We're going to have to rebase back onto this iOS version. And I think I burned 18 months of time with a hundred engineers, literally from the decision I made in the first week of joining Shopify, and Toby, when I went to Toby and I told him, I go, hey man, I think I made this mistake and we have to do this and it's going to cost us a hundred engineers, another six, whatever. And he looked at me and he goes, you should tell everyone this story. That's all he said. Not like, hey, bad, good. He goes, did you learn something? It was an epiphany for me, but he was like, this is a learning org, and I totally failed and I told everyone I failed and my mistake and everything else, but he goes, just tell everyone because he goes, do you know what mistake you made?

(01:23:57):
And first I was like, I don't think, like, what mistake. He's like, you didn't take. He goes, I will always come down harshly on people who do not take risks, and you did not take a risk in this case. But if you take a risk and it doesn't work out, you'll never get in trouble, because you took the risk and it was the right risk to take, but he goes, but you didn't take the risk.

(01:24:16):
And so what I should have done, and by the way, even now thinking back it would be super hard to do, first week at Shopify, right, is take a risk on a platform that we have not launched in production app on, but he was correct in that we should have, because we would've saved ourselves so much more time. So yeah, total failure, sorry. The product is super successful now and we're all on React Native and even the Shop Green app is on React Native. Everything's React Native, and we're core contributors. It's all good. But I literally burned I think 18 months of time for a hundred engineers as my first decision in the company.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:24:48):
This might be the best example of failure coordinator we've had yet. This is a great example. Both of them actually are, although I'm wondering, okay, that felt like a really good decision to me and it's-

Farhan Thawar (01:24:58):
It sounds like it, right? But It wouldn't have been his.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:25:02):
But it's, obviously you don't want to just take risks. There's a limit of a risk but informed, I guess. Is there anything you missed there that would told you this was the right path? Because in hindsight, of course we should have done this, but looking back, what do you think you should have done other than we should have done the risky path?

Farhan Thawar (01:25:19):
Yeah, I mean one thing about my career as well is I don't really do anything halfway. And when I started looking into React Native, it was never just that I'm going, oh, let me look at the docs and read and build a thing. It's like I flew to Meta and met with the React team. I became a core contributor. I ran the React Native working group, like we became release captains for React Native. I knew that I was going to do all the things, so I'm like, and of course in React Native you can also drop down to native and do things there that are not possible. So I think I hedged incorrectly. I knew I was going to do all these things and I should have looked at my own thought process, say, if I do all the things, can I fail? And I didn't take that into account because again, I did five or six.

(01:25:58):
I literally, I put everyone together. I was running the group, I was like release captain. I would hang out with the React team and Meta, we're doing all the things. We became core contributors at React Native before we became core contributors and react because of all the things I was doing. And so I think just knowing that I was going to go all out, I should have said, you know what? This is not going to fail. And I didn't have the confidence in that path, so I hedged, right? Hedging is the worst. And I remember the CTO at the time said, I'm wondering if I should force you to go React Native. He literally said that. And I said, I will do if you say that, I will do it, but it would've been his decision. And so he didn't do it. He didn't tell me to do it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:36):
Okay, that makes a lot more sense. It's so funny that Facebook had a similar mistake early on in their career-

Farhan Thawar (01:26:44):
HTML5.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:26:45):
Yeah, exactly. I know. I don't know if you were at Zuck's interview at the Chase center that the Acquired podcast did, and he talked about this where their market cap dropped 80%. They were about to go public. They went with this app. No one thought they could do mobile ads. And he's like, that set us back a year and a half. He's like, but based on all the pain he's gone through back since then, he's like, that was not too bad.

Farhan Thawar (01:27:08):
Yeah, it's true actually, maybe what people don't know is, I was at Facebook, XtremeLabs, worked on the Facebook app and we worked on that app. I was in the office when we submitted the iOS app every single day that week, because it kept crashing. And we had obviously direct access to people at Apple, but we'd ship a new app on Monday and it crashed ship an app on... Not just us, but us, Facebook together. And so I remember that whole HTML five fiasco from the inside.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:36):
I thought you would say you also told Facebook to decide on the HTML5 app to set them back a year.

Farhan Thawar (01:27:41):
I did not. We happened to be there when they were doing it. Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:27:45):
That's so funny. Amazing. Thank you for sharing that. Before we get to a very exciting lightning round, is there anything else that you think would be valuable to leave listeners with, either touch on something you've mentioned, a last piece of nugget of wisdom, or we just go straight to the round?

Farhan Thawar (01:28:01):
Yeah, I'll say something maybe embarrassing for you. I've been using your performance management framework from your first round review article, not knowing by the way that it was you. I actually found it, you being the famous Lenny podcaster, but the old days, maybe the Lenny, the PM. And I remember reading this a long time ago and just copying, there's a Google link in there to a Google Doc link with a template for a performance review framework that I've been using for years.

(01:28:32):
Literally every review I've done at Shopify uses that framework. And I was writing a post to my admin about how we can use LLMs to make it easier for me to write these reviews, even though obviously you have to read it all and go through it, but I was like, how can I generate some of this with an LLM? And so I wanted to send her the original article. So I went back to the first round review, I found the article and said, oh my God, it's Lenny, the same guy.

(01:28:54):
So I will say one thing that's interesting about that framework is, I've used it now for, like I said, six years here, is that, and I don't think it's me. I think it's actually the framework pulls out good information. I've had multiple people in a review process tell me that, when I deliver the feedback in, of course the format, they would say, wow, I've been in industry a long time. This is the best performance review I've ever had. And it's because the framework pulls out good information. So congrats to you.

(01:29:21):
But I think it was funny that randomly I was coming on this podcast and I just wrote that doc to my admin two, three weeks ago and realized it's the same person.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:29):
Well, how about that? I love that. I'll also give credit to a four board guest on this podcast, Vlad Loktev, who was my manager at Airbnb, and that's where I was inspired to write about that framework.

Farhan Thawar (01:29:29):
Amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:29:41):
So it trickles down to him and I don't know where he boarded this, he probably invented it. So credit to Vlad also for that. Another fun fact along these lines, I have another first round of repost about the W framework, which is a framework for planning. They do annual planning. And that's one that I've slowly discovered many, many companies use and they don't know where it came from. They just call it, oh, we have this W framework. Someone flipped it and call the M framework. But that's another one that has trickled into the ether of tech companies, which is awesome.

Farhan Thawar (01:30:10):
Amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:12):
With that, Farhan, we have reached our very exciting lightning round. Are you ready?

Farhan Thawar (01:30:17):
I'm ready.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:30:18):
Let's do this. What are two or three books that you have recommended most to other people?

Farhan Thawar (01:30:23):
There's one. So Toby has an annoyingly long set of books that he recommends, and they're all, not all, they're usually good, depends because we're not totally in sync on fiction, for example. But he recommended one to me that I think everyone should read right now called Manna, M-A-N-N-A, from Marshall Brain. It is a book, it's a book about AI. And I think the most interesting thing about it though is about a future in which the AI tells the humans what to do. So it's this idea of, imagine in the future you came into work and the AI would tell you what emails to pay attention to or what dashboard to look at because something weird is going on. It takes that to an interesting level. So I would recommend reading that book. It's not long. That's fun.

(01:31:05):
I think another book that I recommend to people, and it's a weird one to recommend, but it's Business Adventures from John Brooks, the famous, if you ask, I think it's Bill Gates, what his famous book of all time is, it's this book.

(01:31:16):
And the cool thing about the book is that it is not easy to digest for anyone with focus problems. Paul Graham wrote the post How to Do Great Work, and it's super long. The best part about that post is that you have to be able to read the whole thing. And so the same thing with Business Adventures. I think each chapter is, it's 12 chapters, 12 stories, no breaks in between. It's just each one is super long. But it just goes into a problem at such depth that if you can maintain your focus to get through the depths of each problem, you will just learn something, just like that post by Paul Graham.

(01:31:51):
I loved that it was so long because I sent it to people and I said, the test here is can you read it? Can you just get to the end? And not in a pejorative way, like in a... If you can get to the end, you will extract the alpha from this post if you can read it all. So those are... Manna is like the opposite. It's very easy and easy read.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:11):
I'm excited to read these. Next question. Do you have a favorite recent movie or TV show you really enjoyed?

Farhan Thawar (01:32:18):
A recent one was Challengers, the tennis movie, with Zendaya just randomly I was at home and I put it on and the cool thing about it was more the cinematography and music. They had this weird style, art house style, where they would be talking and music would get super loud. It was very strange, but a very, very good movie. And then you saw, you said movies and-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:40):
Or TV show. Oh, TV show, anything like that.

Farhan Thawar (01:32:42):
Yeah, one of my all time favorites is probably Halt and Catch Fire. I don't know if you've watched that.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:47):
About the early tech industry.

Farhan Thawar (01:32:48):
Early tech. And I think there was an Andreessen podcast where he said this is the closest thing to what a real startup looks like. So Halt and Catch Fire like an all time recommend, everybody has to watch it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:32:59):
Do you have a favorite product that you recently discovered that you really love?

Farhan Thawar (01:33:03):
I don't know if I want to be in the zeitgeist right now, but the Meta Ray-Bans are amazing. And the biggest thing about the Meta Ray-Bans was just that I think I never got into it and I saw people around me wearing it, but I only got into it when somebody said I'd never take my AirPods with me anymore. And I was like, oh, I can swap two devices for one device. I always have sunglasses and AirPods because I'll go for a walk or listen to a podcast and now I can just have one device.

(01:33:26):
And this happened to me. I was in the summer, I was at a pool party and someone called me and I just took it from my sunglasses and people were confused as where I was taking this call from. But they are the right amount of tech. They're in unintrusive, you can't tell, they don't look like any tech. And then also I was playing soccer with my kids. I have three kids. I just turned the video on and I was the goalie and they were taking shots and I was watching them. They had no idea that I was just recording. And it was such a cool moment because I was in playing soccer with them. I wasn't with my phone and I got to get this amazing set of video that I would never would've gotten. So I really liked the Meta Ray-Bans.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:33:58):
We had Boz on the podcast who leads a lot of that work and he's got a to teach us. And I put on Ray-Bans while we were doing the interview just for fun. You could see my setup. Okay, cool. Two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you find useful in work or in life?

Farhan Thawar (01:34:15):
Okay, I do. And it's on a lot of my profile bios, and it is, everything you know is wrong. And the reason I like that one, and people always like, what would you put on a billboard? And people always come back to me and say, that's like they know that as my motto.

(01:34:32):
And the reason for that is it's this notion of if all the knowledge you knew was incorrect, could you from first principles build up a view of the world? And that's kind of how I like to think of things is that, anything could be incorrect. Even things that you think are correct, which is why, again, back to the, I like to experiment. I like to look stupid, because I'm always trying shit because I'm like, I don't know if even though you say this is correct, that this is going to work, right.

(01:34:58):
Actually, one example, my wife hates this is I have a Tesla and I routinely will switch gears without fully stopping the car, which you cannot do in a regular car, but I'll be in drive and then I'll slow down to drive back up into my driveway and while it's moving I switch it into reverse.

(01:35:14):
And you never would know that that's possible except for trying. And sometimes it goes beep beep because you're going too fast. And she hates it. But I'm always trying weird things and so that's why I say everything you know is wrong. Who knows what's possible, just try different things.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:29):
I do the same thing with my Tesla. I used to do it with a non-electric car and my wife is always like, don't do that. Screwing it up.

Farhan Thawar (01:35:34):
Yes, exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:35):
I love that on an electric car, there's no gear you're breaking, it's just software.

Farhan Thawar (01:35:39):
Exactly.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:35:41):
This quote reminds me of that you shared of everything you know is wrong. The founders of Airbnb always talked about just this point that everything around you was designed somebody, another human. There's not necessarily that much smarter or insightful. It doesn't mean what they did was correct. Somebody else find some better potentially...

Farhan Thawar (01:35:57):
I think Steve Jobs had a similar thing like, hey, you can design anything. Everything's designed by people. I love that one too.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:03):
Yeah. Final question. So you told me the story of this PhD you hired versus just a guy you met in a college, sorry, in a coffee shop. I read another similar story where you hired a waitress.

Farhan Thawar (01:36:14):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:36:14):
Is that real? Okay, tell that story.

Farhan Thawar (01:36:17):
Yeah, so again, this is another long list of reasons my wife is in annoyed with me, but this is another one of them. Whenever we are out, I'm always scanning and I'm always scanning people and one, do I know anybody around, whatever. I like to scan for people and I have a good memory for faces. But in this case we were at a restaurant and I saw a waitress doing a very, very good job, an extremely, like she was running between different tables, she was smiling her face, taking everyone's order, making sure that there was a thing happening in the kitchen. She was kind of doing a phenomenal job of organizing the entire crazy busy restaurant. And so in talking to her, I said, what do you do outside of this because you look like you're super. She's like, what do you mean? I'm just the waitress.

(01:36:59):
And I said, well, would you like to, this is XtremeLabs. I Said, would you like to work at XtremeLabs? She's like, what's that? So I explained it to her and I got her contact info. She came into the office and she first started off as our receptionist, so she moved from the retail world into the office world, and then I brought her on as my admin and she became one of my recruiters. And I taught her how to recruit and talked to people and she came in with me to info sessions. And over time we actually hired many more people from the restaurant that were really, really good at their job. And what was amazing was, one, she was organized but not reorganized. I had to teach her at Google Docs and G Suite and everything else, but she was super smart but just never had the opportunity.

(01:37:35):
The coolest thing about this is that she ended up being, she ended up taking over one of the HR functions for us. And she had a college degree and because of the work she had done with us, she was able to parlay that into finishing, doing one more year and getting a university degree. And now she's a director of HR at a company, which is amazing from, like, she went from that environment to this environment and a lot of her people, she pulled the smart and intense people she pulled from that environment also ended up on these amazing career paths. If I see someone doing a good job, I'm like, what do they do? How can I work with them? This is one example of pulling somebody out of that environment. I have lots of other ones where I overhear someone in their designer or an engineer and I try to hire them into my company as well.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:22):
Wow. That is such a good story. I love that. Maybe restaurants are the new feeder system for tech companies. Did not think about that.

Farhan Thawar (01:38:31):
Yeah, I mean, everyone's smart at something, so I was trying to figure out, she was really good at this thing. She'd be so good at something else.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:38:36):
Amazing. I feel like there's so many stories, more stories to tell, but we're going to wrap it up and let you go, farhan. Two final questions. Where can folks find you a line if they want to reach out, learn more, maybe apply to work at Shopify and how can listeners be useful to you?

Farhan Thawar (01:38:50):
Sure, so Twitter's probably the place I try to hang out the most, X at FNThawar, and maybe I'll put that in the show notes. And then listeners for me. I mean, I love to be challenged. I'm sure that there are people who are like, they heard something that I said and they're like, oh, that's super dumb. We do this instead. Or here's research that says that that won't work. I would love to hear more about these because I'm just again, on a learning journey and if I did something stupid, very likely I would like to learn a better way to do things. So I would love for people to comment and say, hey, this is dumb. You should try this, or, that doesn't make any sense. I would love to learn more. So that's what I'm looking for.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:39:25):
All right, well leave a comment in YouTube or on the Substack post with what Farhan got wrong.

Farhan Thawar (01:39:31):
Amazing.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:39:33):
Thank you so much for being here. Thanks for having me. Bye everyone.

(01:39:38):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Gergely Orosz (00:00:00):
In my best year at Uber, I made about 320 or $330,000 in total compensation. And when I quit my job, I was actually thinking, am I crazy? Because I am leaving... Especially in Europe, this is a lot of money [inaudible 00:00:14] this will be similar to something... Someone in a similar position would've made five or 600K in total in the U.S. But now I am making more in compensation that I made at Uber. And the difference is that now my compensation... Well, my earnings keep going up as long as the newsletter is growing, so there's no theoretical cap on this. Of course there's an actual cap, there's churn, growth is slowing over time. But it's very, very strange, because I felt that I was in a really privileged position, just honestly making tons of money, doing a job that I loved. And this was at Uber or as a software engineer. And I'm now doing stuff that I love, and in some strange way, I guess it even pays better.

Lenny (00:00:59):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast. I'm Lenny, and my goal here is to help you get better at the craft of building and growing products. I interview world class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard won experiences building and scaling today's most successful companies. Today my guest is Gergely Orosz. In a sense, Gergely is the me of engineering. He's got the top engineering newsletter on Substack, it's growing really fast, and like me, he does this full time. In this episode, we talk about the life of newslettering full time, like we both do. We get into Gergely's decision to leave his cushy tech job at Uber, to go into this life full-time, what the day-to-day life of a newsletter person is, the pros and cons of this life, what it takes to be successful, and a bunch of advice for how to get started if you're curious about going down this route. This is a pretty unique episode, and it was really fun to do. If you ever thought about writing or going down this creator route, you'll love this episode. With that, I bring you Gergely Orosz.

Lenny (00:02:06):
This episode is brought to you by lemon.io. You've achieved product market fit. You're able to activate, engage, and retain your customers. But you don't have the engineers that you need to move as fast as you want to, because it's hard to find great engineers quickly, especially if you're trying to protect your burden rate. Meet lemon.io. Lemon.io will quickly match you with skilled senior developers who are all vetted, results oriented, and ready to help you grow. And all that at competitive rates. Startups choose lemon.io because they offer only hand-picked developers with three or more years of experience and strong proven portfolios. Only 1% of candidates who apply get in, so you can be sure that they offer you only high quality talent. And if something ever goes wrong, lemon.io offers you a swift replacement, so that you're kind of hiring with a warranty.

Lenny (00:02:55):
To learn more, just go to lemon.io/lenny and find your perfect developer or tech team in 48 hours or less. And if you start the process now, you can claim a special discount exclusively for Lenny's Podcast listeners. 15% off your first four weeks of working with your new software developer. Grow faster with an extra pair of hands. Visit lemon.io/lenny.

Lenny (00:03:20):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation A/B testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like Netlify and Tenfold and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern growth team stack. This leads to wasted time building internal tools, or trying to run your experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved about our experimentation platform was being able to easily slice results by device, by country, and by [inaudible 00:03:56]. Eppo does all that and more, delivering results quickly, avoiding annoying prolonged analytics cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover. Eppo lets you go beyond basic clickthrough metrics, and instead use your North Star metrics like activation, retention, subscriptions, and payments. And Eppo supports tests on the front end, the back end, email marketing, and even machine learning clients. Check out Eppo at geteppo.com, get E-P-P-O.com, and 10x your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:04:28):
Gergely, welcome to the podcast.

Gergely Orosz (00:04:35):
It's awesome. Great to be here, Lenny.

Lenny (00:04:36):
So I think this is going to be a pretty special and unique podcast. Your newsletter is the number one technology newsletter on Substack, called the Pragmatic Engineer, by the way. My newsletter is the number one business newsletter on Substack, and so we're connected in this really special, weird way, and I thought it would be pretty fun to just explore this weird path that we're on doing this newsletter thing, and in that, help listeners understand the pros and cons of this life, how to go down this route, what it takes to be successful, all that stuff. But before we get into all that, I'd love for you to spend maybe a minute just giving us a little overview of your career, and how you got to where you are today doing this newsletter, and what you spend your time on now.

Gergely Orosz (00:05:19):
My career started out as what you might consider a pretty typical software engineer career. I graduated from university, I did a computer science degree for a five year program, so I did bachelor's and master's. I worked on the side, I hacked around, built small websites here and there, and during university I worked at a small web agency. And then I worked my way up in the industry. So I started off at a consulting company, we were just building for other companies. I'm originally from Hungary, in Europe. I then moved to UK, which was a big step up for me in terms of just getting access to, I guess, more modern software development. I was at a consulting company there as well. And I moved up to London, which in Europe, I feel it's like the New York of Europe, or even the Silicon Valley, back in the day. Back before Brexit, it was the biggest tech hub.

Gergely Orosz (00:06:11):
I worked at an investment bank there, and then on the side I was always building mobile apps, and I got into Skype. I like to say Skype, but it was Microsoft. They just bought Skype at that point, and it was a lot more startup-y environment, a lot more fast moving. I then moved to another startup where I was a founding engineer of a acquisition. It's a startup called Skyscanner. And then I ended up at Uber at Amsterdam, where I joined as a senior software engineer, and I became a manager, and then a manager of managers, and it was just... I feel, looking back at that part of my career, I just felt really growing all the time, just taking each step one step at a time, which gave me a lot of appreciation for all these levels.

Gergely Orosz (00:06:51):
And then, just as I was on this really good career path, I was on the path to being a senior engineering manager, or who knows, one day I might have had a shot of being their director of engineering as well, I decided to leave Uber. And we'll talk about it a little later in the podcast, but I didn't plan like this, but I started writing a newsletter. And now here I am writing a newsletter where a bunch of people are reading it, and it's a really unexpected turn and a really cool life as well.

Lenny (00:07:19):
Awesome. On the newsletter, just to give people a little bit of context of how big this has gotten, can you share just a couple stats about the growth of the newsletter, the size, and anything else you want to share there?

Gergely Orosz (00:07:30):
Just today I checked and it said 189,000 subscribers. I think the past 90 days has been growing with 80,000 subscribers, so it's almost a thousand people per day, which is incredible. Because these numbers are huge. If you're listening, you're probably thinking, "Wow." And that's how I feel every day as well. But I've been writing a blog for many, many years, and these are numbers I never thought it would be. And the growth just seems to be accelerating. There was a tipping point in April where the newsletter was growing... In the first about nine months of the newsletter, it got to 50,000 subscribers, and then the next five months, or six or seven months, it went up by another a hundred and something thousand subscribers. This was when Substack introduced recommendations, which has been a massive growth engine, and I guess being one of the top publications, I benefited from it. But those numbers are again...

Gergely Orosz (00:08:26):
So this is a paid newsletter as well. So there's a free version and a paid version, and there's thousands of people paying for the newsletter. It's a single digit percentage, but it's a very, very healthy one. And again, it just beat all my expectations. And I guess we're in similar boats, because our newsletter setup, yours and mine, is somewhat similar. We have plenty of differences as well, but I make most of my revenue from subscriptions, and I don't do sponsorships or ads in the newsletter. So if people sign up for the free one, they get articles every now and then, and for the paid one, they get it a lot more and in more depth.

Lenny (00:08:59):
Can you give listeners a sense of just the order of magnitude income you make from this, versus your cushy tech job at Uber? You don't have to share numbers or anything like that.

Gergely Orosz (00:09:09):
Yeah. I'll share a little numbers of my cushy tech job at Uber. I was in Europe, and European tech salaries, or I'll say total compensation, will be lower than for example the U.S., but it'll be higher than let's say regions like India or Indonesia. There's regional differences, and this is true for big tech as well. Uber was a good example on this. But in my best year at Uber, I made about 320 or $330,000 in total compensation. This was after Uber went public, so it includes the stock, the base salary, the bonus, which was very, very good in Europe. And when I quit my job, I was actually thinking, "Am I crazy? Because I'm leaving..." Especially in Europe, this is a lot of money [inaudible 00:09:53] this will be similar to something... Someone in a similar position would've made five or 600 K in total in the U.S.

Gergely Orosz (00:10:00):
So I walked away from that, and I was pretty sure that I'll just [inaudible 00:10:04] a lot less, but I'll enjoy what I'm doing, or I'll have... I'll just give it a go. But now I am making more in compensation that I made at Uber. And the difference is that now my compensation, my earnings, keep going up as long as the newsletter is growing, so there's no theoretical cap on this. Of course there is an actual cap, there's churn, growth is slowing over time, but it's very, very strange, because I felt that I was in a really privileged position, just honestly making tons of money, doing a job that I loved. And this was at Uber or as a software engineer. And I'm now doing stuff that I love, and in some strange way, I guess it even pays better. Part of it is just luck, part of this is situational. I think we're going to talk a bit more about this. But this was very, very surprising and very unexpected for me.

Lenny (00:10:55):
Awesome. That's a great segue to the first thing I want to talk about, but just to frame what I want to spend our time on today, there's these four areas I want to explore. One is your decision to leave and start this life of writing, which is a very non-traditional life. Two is what the life of a paid newsletter person is like. What do you do all day? How do you find time to do this? How do you produce so much content? Three, what it takes to be successful at this. A lot of people... I always say it's easy to start a newsletter, hard to keep it going, and I'm curious what you find is important to be successful. And then four, how do you get started if you want to start your own newsletter?

Lenny (00:11:30):
But before I get into that, I just wanted to add a thought that I had. The way I think about this life in terms of comparing to the old job is, one, it feels instead of one boss, I have thousands of micro bosses, and one of them can fire me and many do every day, but it feels safer than at a tech job where one person can decide. And then the other piece is, assuming it keeps growing, you're getting a raise almost every day, every week, depending on the growth rate, and that's cool.

Gergely Orosz (00:11:57):
That is really cool. I had a spreadsheet that I maintained for the first year of the publication, where I listed, for every article, how much did my annual revenue go up a week later. So tracking what was the impact. And the crazy thing was that, when I wrote a really good article that resonated with people, sometimes it was an article that I thought was mediocre and people still loved it [inaudible 00:12:20] it was a really good article that I put tons of work in, I saw myself getting a raise. And this is just something you just don't get in corporate. I mean, it's by design, and there's a lot of good stuff about it, but I feel that this life, and we'll touch more on this, but there's a lot of surprising things, both good and bad, but this is a really good one. So for doing something awesome, you can just give yourself a raise, especially because this is just like you, mine is also a one person business right now.

Lenny (00:12:49):
Yeah. Okay. So you're at Uber, you're making hundreds of thousands of dollars writing code, it's pretty sweet. Uber's growing. You probably got all these RSUs that are going to keep accumulating. It's pretty good. And you decide, "I'm going to try to make money on the internet writing," which is an obvious way to make a lot of money. Not. And so I'm curious, what got you to leave that job and explore writing and get to this writing path?

Gergely Orosz (00:13:20):
The short of it is, it was a promise to myself, and COVID, and Uber doing layoffs. And the longer version is that, when I joined Uber, before Uber I was... Now we're talking numbers on my old job, but I was working in London as a principal engineer at Skyscanner. Skyscanner was a unicorn, one of the few unicorns in the UK, UK headquartered and all that, and I was making like 90-something thousand pounds in base salary, which is maybe a 120, 130, or $140,000, depends on how the pound is doing, or sometimes these days it's almost just the same. But back then that was a really good... And this was most of it. I got some stock as well. And I thought I was close to the top of the market in London. I knew people, and it seemed this was a really good compensation package.

Gergely Orosz (00:14:05):
And then Uber called me up saying, "Do you want to interview?" I interviewed with them, they gave me an offer, and I negotiated, and they basically doubled my compensation. I was like, wow, this is [inaudible 00:14:16] I knew about Silicon Valley compensation, but I assumed that [inaudible 00:14:20] you're not going to get this, but Uber was getting something closer to that. So I told myself, all right, so I'm getting a really good deal, and most of it is stock, which is... Uber [inaudible 00:14:32] 2016, no-one knew if Uber will go public, although I suspected, because they contacted me to build a payments team so do a SOX compliant payment system. And you need a SOX compliant payment system if you want to go IPO.

Lenny (00:14:44):
That's funny. It reminds me at Airbnb, there's all these people trying to figure out, when are we going to go public? And then there's the team working on SOX stuff and Sarbanes-Oxley, this is good.

Gergely Orosz (00:14:55):
Yeah. So anyway, I said, all right, this is a massive lottery ticket. If it goes in, every year I make two years of salary, pretty much. That's how I was thinking. But if not, again, don't forget I'm in Europe where we're used to not seeing any returns on stock. So European software engineers will not value stock as much, because they just haven't seen success stories. So I told myself, if four years later Uber exits and I make a bunch of money, I owe it to myself to take a risk, because then I'll have four years of savings in my bank, which... Back then I had maybe six months of savings or something. So this was the promise to myself.

Gergely Orosz (00:15:32):
And then I probably would've forgotten about this, but four years later, almost on the dot, COVID starts, and it really hit super hard. We're laying off people, we had to lay off 20% of the engineers. I was already managing a group of about 30 people, I had managers under me, and 20% of the people or 15% had to be let go. And I was thinking to myself, what am I doing here? I looked ahead, Uber was going to have a really bad year, I'm going to have to manage morale. Up to then, I'd helped put together this team, and we had a really good charter, and we had to throw that charter out the window, because it made no sense with the economic reality. So I thought back, and I told myself, if I'll be here, I'll take a risk, and I'll try to do something else. So I was like, all right, let me pull this trigger.

Gergely Orosz (00:16:18):
And my plan was very simple. Leave Uber and start a startup, raise venture capital, because I haven't done that before but it kind of runs in the family. My brother's on his second startup, and he sold his first one to Skyscanner, and now he's building this startup called Craft Docs. It's a really slick document editing system, they just raised their series B. So through him I know [inaudible 00:16:42] startup life is, and I felt I never did that, I always worked at big companies.

Gergely Orosz (00:16:45):
So my plan was [inaudible 00:16:47] leave Uber, raise money, and do something on platform engineering. A classic way that Uber alumni start businesses is, Uber has invested silly amounts of money to build everything custom internally. Everything that you can think of. Our [inaudible 00:17:02] system was custom, our experimentation system, our container, the way we automatically set that up, a lot of the engineering stuff. So a lot of Uber alumni just leave, and whatever they saw there, they just build it for the world to use, because no other company really does what Uber does, because it makes no sense, but a lot of them will pay for.

Gergely Orosz (00:17:20):
That was the plan. But before [inaudible 00:17:22] I wanted to finish a book. I'd been writing this book for, it was coming up to a year, called the Software Engineer's Guidebook, which is just my advice for people to grow professionally in the field. And I figured, all right, let me leave the company, in six months I'll write the book, I'll just use my savings to take a break, and then I'll raise the venture capital. And what happened was, I started to write this book, but I got sidetracked, I started to have fun online in terms of... I was writing on Twitter, on my blog. I accidentally published a book called Building Mobile Apps at Scale. I just did it for a few months.

Gergely Orosz (00:17:58):
And the weird thing was that my plan was that I'm going to just not make any money, and this book, Building Mobile Apps at Scale, and another book that I published about tech resumes, I just wrote these in a few months, they started making money. They made about $100,000 in the first year. And I was like, "That's interesting. People are buying my books." And I self-published it through Gumroad or places where I get to keep I think 90% of the revenue, but still, this was really interesting. And I got to the point where, all right, I should now start a startup. I should do fundraising and do all that. And then I asked myself, why do I really want to do that?

Gergely Orosz (00:18:34):
And the answer was two reasons. One is, I love working in small teams at Uber. I'll be honest, I didn't really enjoy being a manager of managers. It felt a bit too abstract. I didn't like being in the meetings, not doing the work. What I really liked is when we had a small team, and we had this really big vision, and it was us against the world. We were like ten of us, and we were just getting stuff done, we were putting out fires, it was so much fun. So that was one of the reasons I wanted to do startup. I was hoping to recreate this feeling.

Gergely Orosz (00:19:05):
And the other thing, honestly, was money. This was in 2021 before the market crashed. Just doing the maths, if you found a company, and I'll be a CEO and the founder, maybe I'll have a co-founder, this becomes a unicorn, by that time we will have raised five rounds of funding or six, I'll be diluted as hell, but I'll still have let's say 5%. 5% of the billion is still $50 million, after you pay taxes [inaudible 00:19:30] I can buy a bunch of stuff that I don't need. And I was asking myself, all right, and then what? And I was like, after I've bought everything that I don't need, I probably want to share what I know with people, do YouTube videos and write books.

Gergely Orosz (00:19:43):
And I was thinking to myself, so hold on. I would go off and do this for like ten years, because that's how much you need to plan to do it. I need to stop doing what I'm doing right now, because I would owe it to my investors and my team to not spend all day on the internet writing about stuff. And then I want to do it again. So it's reminding me of the story of this fisherman. There's one that goes [inaudible 00:20:08] there's the same thing of, you work really hard to do what you're doing right now. So I decided, let me just try giving this a go. [inaudible 00:20:14]

Lenny (00:20:14):
Wait, what's the story of the fisherman? I think I know what you're talking about, but... [inaudible 00:20:18]

Gergely Orosz (00:20:17):
The story of the fisherman is that, in Mexico, an American businessman sees a fisherman who's just chilling, fishing. And he asks him, "What are you doing all day?" He's like, "I fish for three hours, I hang out with my family, I [inaudible 00:20:32] chill and I sleep in every Saturday and Sunday." He says, "All right, here's what you should be doing. You should fish not three hours, but you should fish five days a week, eight hours a day, sell that fish, turn over a profit, hire more people to do it, then start to be head of all those people, then sell your fishing company." He's like, "Okay. And then what?" "And then you can actually buy an island, and you can just fish for three hours, you can sleep in on Saturdays and sleep on Sundays."

Gergely Orosz (00:21:00):
So I was thinking, look, I have savings. I don't have huge, but I have it for... I can still take a risk. So let me take a risk on writing. And I was thinking originally of just spending more time to finish my book. But what I didn't like about books, even though I was making money, is they're really... It's hard to predict if you're going to be making a living, or there's some people who actually like this excitement, but I didn't like it. I didn't know if today I'm going to be making like 50 bucks or 10 bucks or 300 bucks. So I was like, interesting. There's these paid newsletters which I've been thinking about, and you were one of the few people who shared some of your early numbers, and I figured this could be interesting, because it's recurring revenue.

Gergely Orosz (00:21:41):
And the only reason I was really hesitant to start a paid newsletter, I was thinking about doing so for at least 6 to 12 months, is I was worried about writing every single week something really, really worthwhile reading, and it's a lot of work. But then I looked back and I saw that I wrote three books. [inaudible 00:21:58] I told you I wrote two books, but there was a third one that I also published in a year, and I was like, I'm pretty sure I can write. So for two weeks I collected ideas of what I would write about, and I had this super long list. So I was like, okay, ideas also check.

Gergely Orosz (00:22:10):
And then I just said, screw it, I'm going to take a risk. It's a bit of a more professional risk, and maybe a financial one as well. I'll announce that I'm going to start a paid newsletter. Every week, I'm going to write something really in depth about software engineering. It's going to start next week. And I told myself that I'll... I told my wife as well that I'll do this for six months, and I'll see what happens. If there's traction, it's great. I might have found myself a new job, basically. If not, I'll just refund people. Everyone who bought an annual subscription... I didn't tell this to people, obviously, but for six months I'm going to give it my all. It's basically like a startup. So I told her and my family that it's going to be a lot of work and I might not be around as much, and they supported me, and I took a plunge. I took a big breath and started off. And that's how it went from leaving Uber to starting a venture funded startup to starting to write full time.

Lenny (00:23:05):
Awesome. And we're going to talk about what advice you have for folks that are thinking about starting something like this at the end. What was the period between leaving Uber and starting the newsletter?

Gergely Orosz (00:23:14):
It was pretty much a year, a little bit less than a year. Might have been like ten months or so, but it was a year from when I decided to leave Uber. So Uber did layoffs in April, and it was really stressful. It was the first time I... I didn't lay anyone off, but people on my team were laid off. I wasn't told who's going to be laid off. It was just really stressful. It's weird, in the sense that the people who were let go, obviously worse for them, but I still felt terrible, and I just didn't feel very good about it. I think this was the breaking point. This was the point where I realized that it's not a family, which is weird because it never was, but it kind of felt family-like, but it's just a corporate, and I'm just a number, and this could happen to me, I guess. So I think I lost my sense of the trust in the system, that it'll take care of me, because I saw some of my colleagues who were really good professionals, I'd argue they were better software engineers and managers than me, they got let go because they were in the wrong team.

Gergely Orosz (00:24:08):
So this was April, and in July I went to a holiday, and two weeks in, I just realized I need to leave. And I really had the urge to do somewhere where I'm in charge. And if you're a manager listening to this, you might relate to this. If you're an engineer listening to this, maybe just shut your ears or you'll figure it out eventually. But when I was promoted into management... It wasn't promoting into it, because it was a side step, I didn't get [inaudible 00:24:34] or anything, but it still feels a promotion. They only promote the people who are... Only let people transition who are considered pretty good. I felt this would be a big deal. I'm now a manager. What no one told me is, yes I was a manager, but I was a middle manager. I didn't have too much authority. I didn't even have budget for my team. Someone was underpaid and I couldn't do anything except complain for HR for six months and hope that they'd do something.

Gergely Orosz (00:24:58):
So it was pretty frustrating, because I didn't feel in charge in the sense that I didn't have decision making [inaudible 00:25:02]. And the reason I wanted to do a startup is, I decided I liked being a manager, but I did not how I was not in charge and I couldn't take corporate [inaudible 00:25:12] telling us to do stuff, and then we were telling them no [inaudible 00:25:16] I don't want to do that with my people. So I decided for next job, I could be doing this, but instead I'd like to be in charge. So I'd like to be a founder or someone who's high up, so that I can actually take full responsibility for the things that I want to do or I don't want to do. The short of it is, I decided to leave in July. We have longer notice periods in Europe, so I served a longer notice period, and then left. But it was a year after the decision.

Lenny (00:25:41):
Let's talk about what your life is like these days, writing a newsletter full time. People might be listening and be like, "Man, $300,000 for writing an email a couple times a week, that's pretty sweet." So I want to talk about the good and the bad of this life. So maybe to start, how many posts are you putting out a week?

Gergely Orosz (00:25:59):
I started the newsletter saying I'm going to post once a week. You'll have one pinned up post. And I started to do that, but interesting enough, eventually I upped it to two, so I now promise people two posts a week. There's more in depth and more timeless posts about some software engineering topic on Tuesdays, and there's something that's called the scoop, something a bit more timely, where I reflect or analyze what's going on in the market, interesting stuff I'm hearing. And every now and then there's a bonus post. So I'll say two on average, but the second one came a lot later. But initially in the first few months I was like, I have this one post per week, and it needs to be good.

Gergely Orosz (00:26:37):
And it was interesting, because you would think writing a post a week is not a big deal. It's easy. As you said, let's say you're making 300K just writing one post a week. But it actually was pretty stressful in the beginning, because it turns out to write that post, it takes at least a few days or sometimes even longer. Sometimes it takes a week or two for me to research in terms of talking with people. I chose topics that are not covered, because why would people pay for something that is out there already or well known? Then I need to write [inaudible 00:27:10] a first draft. I get some feedback from people who I trust often, not always, but I often do. And then there's an editing phase where I work with an editor who helps make sure that it's just correct. And all these things add up. Even if I only spend a day researching the stuff, it's a day researching, then I have a draft on day two. Day three I get feedback, on day four it's editing, it's almost a whole week.

Gergely Orosz (00:27:32):
So I was working on parallel things at the same time, and I was often running against the deadline, I was barely finishing it, which is not what I was expecting initially. The first few months I feel was a bit more stressed, but again, the good thing is I cleared my calendar, so I said I'm not talking with anyone, I'm just doing this. So in that sense it was good. But the one thing I realized, if you look at any journalists who's doing stuff full time, and they're writing, not these clickbait articles, but actually in depth. You look at the Washington Post or New York Times, search for their name, and look up the articles that they write, and they're going to be longer articles. They have like one a month. Seriously. You look at the investigative journalist, they might even have less. And they have a bit of a different level, they have to check with legal and all those things, but my editor is a journalist, so he was actually telling me, even back then, "You actually write a lot of original stuff," because a lot of my emails are about five, 6,000 words, which is considered very long.

Lenny (00:28:32):
Yeah. When you said that people listening might be like, one post a week is easy, I think most people are the opposite. They're just like, I can't write anything. I don't have time for any writing. How can you ever write one good thing a week? So I think there's both sides to it. And it's cool that you shared the process. Do you have a specific cadence per post? It's like Monday draft, Tuesday review, Wednesday editor. Is that how you work?

Gergely Orosz (00:28:58):
I write every post over multiple weeks, most of them. Some of them I might be able to write faster, but what I now have is, nowadays I actually write two articles. So I have the Thursday that is the scoop, which actually is a lot easier for me to write, interestingly enough. And my cadence is, on Monday I finish up the last of the post that goes out on Tuesday. It's just small edits, but it's already done pretty much, so it's just a few small tweaks, and maybe I have some feedback coming in. On Tuesday, I publish this post, and I do some free writing. I write about some other ideas that I have that's going to be future posts. On Wednesday, it's my free day in between, where I... It's interesting, because what I feel is, when I don't have pressure, I tend to not do much stuff, which might just... My mind's saying, "You just need to chill." Maybe that's it.

Gergely Orosz (00:29:49):
But one thing I miss from the corporate world... And if you're listening and you're in a job and you're thinking, "Gergely's job is so amazing," one thing that I liked and I really miss about working at Uber is, I actually had a schedule. This is weird, I hated it back then, but I needed to do these things, and whenever you have a pressure, you do it. And this works with my newsletter. I put in the second newsletter I think to have a bit more pressure. Because the second part of Wednesday, I'm already starting to write my Thursday newsletter. On Thursday, I write that Thursday newsletter, and on Friday I'm now writing the next newsletter for Tuesday. So almost every day except for Wednesday, I have a strong pressure to write. Which when people ask, "Gergely, how do you write so much?" Because I did the maths, and I wrote four or five books' worth of content just last year. It's because I have these deadlines, and as you said, I also know that thousands of people are paying me, they have expectations of me.

Gergely Orosz (00:30:46):
And so this is how it's done. If you want to write a book, the easiest way is go to a publisher and sign a contract, not because of the money. In software engineering, you're not going to get much [inaudible 00:30:57] $5,000 or something like that. That's what I was offered initially. But it's the pressure. You absolutely should go to a publisher or have some external... Someone to hold you accountable, and then you'll get it done. And I'll let you in on another secret, or not so secret.

Lenny (00:31:16):
Do tell.

Gergely Orosz (00:31:16):
In my mind, when I started newsletter a year ago in this crossroads, I want to write this book, which I think will be a great book, the Software Engineer's Guidebook, I feel it'll be my summary of my last ten years of what I have to share as advice, but I was worried that it's just a big project that's just going to take months, and I'll lose motivation midway.

Gergely Orosz (00:31:37):
And partially, I went down the newsletter route because I liked how every week I would have to write something, and I had this sneaky idea of, what if I wrote this book where I write some posts that will be part of the book, and then the book will just come together partially. And I've kind of been doing that. I haven't been telling people, but some of the posts are going to be... Not exactly, but the idea is that I have this chapter, and I have this list, have I written about this topic in the newsletter? And you know where I got this idea from? There's the book The Three Musketeers, from Alexander Dumas [inaudible 00:32:12]. And do you know how it was written?

Lenny (00:32:15):
I don't.

Gergely Orosz (00:32:16):
So he wrote the book for a magazine. He was apparently just low on money, and he started to write for this magazine who told them, "All right, we need you to write something that our readers will want, so that they will buy the magazine." I think he was getting a cut of some sales or something. So he needs to write in a way that was interesting, and then cut it off in a way that people would come back and buy the next one. And he wrote a whole book, and that book, when I read it, it's really long, and I was like, hold on, if he could do this, then this is a good strategy. He was writing it because he just needed the money. That's all. And then he wrote a really good book on the way.

Gergely Orosz (00:32:52):
So one big learning for me from newsletters then... I would argue that you can use this not just for newsletters, but any business that you do. If you're going to go out and start a new business, you'll probably have some ideas. And it's not just going to be a newsletter, it's going to be a bunch of other things. If you put in ways that you have to do certain things, put in constraints for the things that you need to do, and then you're going to do that.

Gergely Orosz (00:33:16):
Without that, when you're on your own, when you're entrepreneur, I was a great... I think I was a really diligent employee. I always tried to get my work done, show up on time, I tried to meet all expectations. But what I noticed is, when I started to work for myself, it just went out the window. Almost 15 years of being this star employee who really wants to do well, I found myself upset at myself for not... Just wasting my day. But I fixed it by telling people, "You're going to get this every week," and now I have to do it. I just have no choice.

Lenny (00:33:51):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate growth. If your business stores any data in the cloud, then you've likely been asked or you're going to be asked about your SOC 2 compliance. SOC 2 is a way to prove your company's taking proper security measures to protect customer data, and builds trust with customers and partners, especially those with serious security requirements. Also, if you want to sell to the enterprise, proving security is essential. SOC 2 can either open the door for bigger and better deals, or it can put your business on hold. If you don't have a SOC 2, there's a good chance you won't even get a seat at the table. Beginning a SOC 2 report can be a huge burden, especially for startups. It's time consuming, tedious, and expensive.

Lenny (00:34:37):
Enter Vanta. Over 3,000 fast growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2. Vanta can get you ready for security audits in weeks instead of months, less than a third of the time that it usually takes. For a limited time, Lenny's Podcast listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to vanta.com/lenny, that's V-A-N-T-A.com/lenny, to learn more and to claim your discount. Get started today.

Lenny (00:35:08):
I definitely wanted to dig into that a little bit deeper, this issue that folks in our line of work run into, which is unstructured time and having to create your own structure. I had the same exact problem when I started this thing, before I even started the newsletter. How do I use my time well? How do I create some kind of deadline for myself? So I'm curious what other tricks you found to help you stay productive and focus, because there's Twitter, there's Instagram, TikTok, there's all these things that pull my attention. And I've learned a couple things I'll share that have been helpful, but I'm curious, what have you found to help you focus and get things out the door? Two posts a week, which is a lot of work.

Gergely Orosz (00:35:49):
So a problem that I have, and this might be unique to newsletters, I'm not sure. I use Twitter for a lot of research. And unfortunately what that means is when I start to write something, it can really pull my attention, because I have Twitter open and then I get a message from someone. It's a little bit like Slack, but I'd argue it can be worse, because also Twitter for me is also something that is very useful in generating people [inaudible 00:36:16] raising awareness. So whenever I tweet, it helps my business. So that's a good thing. But it also justifies for me spending more time on, for example, Twitter than I would want to. So I find that I come up with a method, and it works for a few months, and then I need to change it because my brain just learns to work around it. So I'll tell you a few things that I did, and I'll tell you where I'm at right now, but I use for example apps. I use this app Centered, but I know you're also there.

Lenny (00:36:45):
Yeah. I love that app. Also an investor [inaudible 00:36:49] disclaimer, but I love it.

Gergely Orosz (00:36:51):
Yeah. And I found that helpful, the idea of focused time and [inaudible 00:36:56] turned on, but it might just be me, but after a while I get used to these things, and I find it not as efficient. I found the Pomodoro method for a few months useful, when you have the 25 minute intervals. And the one thing that has never failed me, but I just find it hard to do, is I find it hard to start. I have this benefit that I have all this time... Sorry, there's two things that always work. One is, it's almost time for me to go home, and then I'm super focused. So when I have this external thing, and I know that there's no way [inaudible 00:37:30] I need to focus on basically the deadline. So if you have deadlines, that works.

Gergely Orosz (00:37:36):
The other thing is, if I start to spend three or four minutes doing something focused, and I get the flow of it. So a trick I sometimes do when I'm just, I just don't feel doing anything, is I set a timer of 20 minutes, and then I say, "All right, no distractions." I have a script where I just kill... I use a [inaudible 00:37:57] host file, I just kill all LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook, whatever sites. So I just cannot reach it. It's just a very simple Python script that I wrote for myself. And then in the first few minutes I'm grumbling, I'm like, "I wish I could do this, I wish I could just look at Twitter to research," but about five minutes in, there's a switch, and I'm now actually heads down and doing it. And this has been the thing that has consistently worked.

Gergely Orosz (00:38:21):
The interesting thing is that I feel guilty a lot of times that I'm not working as hard as I could. And I do wonder if it's guilt, or if it's my mind or body telling me that it just wants a break or it wants to do something else. I still haven't figured it out, but I'm on the way there.

Lenny (00:38:39):
Awesome. That's a really cool trick, the host file trick. So that's [inaudible 00:38:43] something that you have to be technical to do. I imagine there's some chrome extensions that could do that to some extent for folks. But the whole idea there is, force your brain not to have any way to look at something that'll be distracting, by blocking your computer from even being able to go to the site. That's awesome.

Gergely Orosz (00:38:59):
Yeah. So there is definitely going to be extensions that you can use, and on this podcast we'll have a variety of people. If you're a software engineer, it's pretty simple, and even if you're not, you can look it up [inaudible 00:39:10] when you override your host file, you can actually block [inaudible 00:39:13] what you do. And I did this because I wrote a script where I need to run the script, and I need to run the script again to unblock it. And it's kind of cool, because I put it together for myself. So I usually find that the tools that other people use, maybe this is just me or maybe this is software engineers, I don't like them because I feel they're either too opinionated or they're not opinionated enough. So I don't know if this is just the fact that I used to like to build my own tools and my own scripts, because I can, so I found that my scripts worked the best for me.

Gergely Orosz (00:39:44):
But as you said, there's a bunch of really good tools. So my advice to people would be, look up all [inaudible 00:39:50] let's try them out. You won't know until you try them. And again, I had stuff that worked really well for a certain amount of time. I don't know why, maybe I just get bored easily or something, that I just need to rotate. But for example, when I went back to Centered... I have no affiliation by the way, so I'm just telling this. But I really liked how they keep evolving as well to do cooler things. They have a community element where you're competing with people on uninterrupted time and closing stuff. So that to me is a... I'll do one last [inaudible 00:40:23] Centered again. I have no affiliation. What I really liked about Centered is, it allows you to turn on your video camera, and I felt really forced to do work, because I knew that people on the other side of the world might be watching me, even if it was not true.

Lenny (00:40:37):
Yeah. I love that feature. It's centered.app, by the way, if folks want to check it out. So to summarize some of your tips, which I love, Centered, deadlines, totally work for me too. Blocking sites so that you can't get distracted by Twitter and LinkedIn and TikTok and all the things. And I guess that's the three that work best for you.

Gergely Orosz (00:40:55):
Yeah. And the simple thing, start a 20 minute timer, and you say, "For 20 minutes, I need to focus on this thing," on your iPhone or somewhere else. It's just 20 minutes, but during that time you cannot do anything else. And just try it. It works for me, like a charm, once I decide to actually do it.

Lenny (00:41:13):
It's cool Centered does that for you, and it has music and all the things. So I that a lot. Awesome. What do you love most about this life that you lead now, versus what you used to do? And then I'm going to ask you the opposite, but let's start there.

Gergely Orosz (00:41:27):
I really like that it forces me to have my calendar empty, because for so many years my calendar was this giant mess of meetings on top of meetings, and I would barely have any time to actually have focus time. Now I actually have the opposite. I usually have a lot of focus time, and I have very, very few meetings or things. And even now I get a little bit cagey [inaudible 00:41:51] I have this one meeting in the whole day. So I like how it's [inaudible 00:41:55] manage your time [inaudible 00:41:58] so that's the best part.

Gergely Orosz (00:41:59):
And I also like how much in charge I am. Initially it freaked me out, in the sense of how much creative freedom I have. I can write about whatever. I can change a format, I can do this, I can do that. It can be a little bit overwhelming, because I also know that people are going to be reading this, and what are they going to think about it? But I do like that it's very entrepreneurial, so I get to experiment a lot as well, which reminds me a little bit of my old job, because at Uber we also experimented a lot, and obviously more in a corporate setting. But I guess that's just gotten extended. So these are the two favorite things, is the open calendar or very few meetings, and experimenting, trying out stuff and being able to decide what I want to try out.

Lenny (00:42:46):
Plus one on both those. I have a rule of no meetings before 3:00 PM, and it generally works 99% of the time. And the reason I do that is, to your point, if there's a meeting at 11:00, I just can't do anything really deep until that point, and then afterwards I have to get back on track. And having that deep focus time is so important for this work, even though half the time I'm on Twitter and distracted, as long as I get enough time to focus, good things happen. Okay. Opposite. What are some of the most surprising downsides and sucky parts of this path that you've taken?

Gergely Orosz (00:43:24):
One is obviously it's lonely. I do miss... I had a really good team at Uber, and it wasn't just a team, it was the people. I liked... Everyone has different views on remote work. I actually didn't enjoy remote work as much, because I just liked hanging out with people. I guess I'm that more outgoing type, and I really like walking up to the coffee station and having a chat with people, or at lunch sitting next to someone and talking about it. And obviously in some sense it was annoying, because I wanted to get work done, but for the most part I miss it more than I have. And so I miss not having that. I compensate for that by working in a shared workspace, a shared office, which is a techy workspace. So everyone needs to work in tech. So I actually get to say hi to people and have a little small talk.

Gergely Orosz (00:44:08):
The structure is weird, because I felt really guilty for the first few months, because I felt that at Uber I was more productive, because I had to be. I was doing so many things. In a day, I would start my day let's say at 9:00 or at 8:30, and I'd finish it up at, I don't know, 6:00 or 5:30, it depends. I would probably have, on an average day, I would have a good eight meetings, I would finish two or three documents, I would send over this, send over that. I actually have... Looking at my output, now I write a lot, but I wrote a lot. I think I wrote almost as much in terms of emails, chat messages, et cetera. So the downside is, I felt very guilty and a little bit frustrated for myself, for feeling that I'm slacking off. That's one.

Gergely Orosz (00:44:55):
And the other thing, it is surprisingly stressful. So when you start off, it's kind of lonely. Not many people do this, what we do. That's also one of the reasons that we connected, because it's a very small community. And even within the community, I feel, in the newsletter community, it's different. You're all running your own business, and there is some level of competition. So you might not... Because it's a little bit of attention economy as well. People are not going to subscribe or pay for ten newsletters on the same topic, so that makes it a little bit more... It's not the same as when you work in tech, and you just share exactly everything that you do, because you can only win.

Gergely Orosz (00:45:35):
So there's that part, but there's a lot of external validation, so whenever looking at your subscriber numbers, which brings a bunch of stress that I didn't expect. And I'm a successful newsletter [inaudible 00:45:47] I think my success is quite rare. There will be one or two or a handful of people who have similar success, but I'm an outlier. So that's another thing that I think is just good [inaudible 00:45:58] putting out there. And the downside is, you don't really know how well you're doing. External goals are kind of meaningless. Internal goals, either you smash them or you don't reach them. So there's this constant sense of, where am I? How am I, and how do I judge myself? Did I make a mistake for leaving my job? I actually asked myself for several months actually, after I started. Or did I make a good one? And I think for a lot of these questions and doubts, having past professional experience working at a company is really useful to set yourself grounded.

Lenny (00:46:33):
I actually want to ask you about that, but I'll add a couple things that I also find are major downsides of this life, because it's not all rainbows and butterflies. One is, with a paid newsletter especially, but even with a sponsored newsletter, you basically have to get something awesome out every week, in theory for the rest of your life. People are buying an annual plan every day, so that means at least a year you have to write something awesome, if you want to stop. But it's hard to stop, because as you pointed out, the income is very meaningful, and that's a hard thing to give up. And so I'm not sure exactly the exit path that exists for us, where we might have to keep writing something awesome for the rest of our life, but I imagine something will emerge and we'll think of something else that we could do.

Gergely Orosz (00:47:19):
Yeah. And it's a really good example, because for a lot of companies, and I assume a lot of listeners are working in tech, typical thing is you work hard, you build equity at a company or you build the value of the company, and then you can sell that company, and then you can have an exit and you can do whatever. For what we're doing, it's really tied to us. So however much or little my newsletter will make, it'll have a value let's say four or five times the annual revenue as a business, but you cannot really sell it like that and you cannot really walk away.

Gergely Orosz (00:47:49):
So that makes it unique, it makes it harder to compete with, which is cool, but it does not create that much of an exit path unless you start to build a company around it, build an organization that can run without you, for example. This is what a lot of book publishing companies... So basically you build a publishing company where you start to hire people, who start to write some of the articles initially, and then later more of them, but it's not a one-person newsletter any more. Or you keep doing this, until you either stop and then the revenue stops, or you might be able to sell it, but at really under value.

Lenny (00:48:24):
Yeah. I really don't want to manage people. I don't want to have employees. And so building a media company with writers, that doesn't sound too fun, but maybe that's where this goes. That is one route, for sure. The other downside I'll just add is the fact that you have to write something awesome every week, it's hard to take meaningful time off, because if you stop producing great stuff, people leave. And I invented this PTO policy for myself where I take four weeks a year off, where I don't do a newsletter, but that means I can't take more than a week off usually [inaudible 00:48:58] weeks in a row, I don't know, people probably won't care, but it feels like things start to not go great if I just don't keep producing great stuff. So that's another downside, just [inaudible 00:49:08] topic.

Gergely Orosz (00:49:09):
Yeah. But a lot [inaudible 00:49:11] very early. So I think the whole concept of paying users is new, so I think we're going to do a lot of experimentation. And also a lot of it, I think you need to figure out what your needs are. So in the first year, I did not take a holiday in terms of... Or even when I [inaudible 00:49:25] I was writing, and it caused a bit of friction with my family. And now I'm solving it in a different way, so I am planning to take more time off now, and I'm doing it by working ahead with some of the less time sensitive things. But it is tough.

Gergely Orosz (00:49:43):
So a downside we haven't mentioned, but I'm just going to call it out, is holiday. The great thing at... I never felt... Well, I felt a little guilty sometimes taking holiday, but when I want a holiday, I took it off. When I had my son born, at Uber, they gave me a four month paid holiday. I took the whole four months, I just logged off. It was great. It wasn't my company. I was still getting stock. The stock price was independent of mostly what I was doing, just being honest. And that was really, really good. So this might be true, by the way, if you start any business, especially while it's just yourself, it's hard to turn off. And I think most people don't mind, I don't mind, but it gets to you. We should be conscious about burnout as a whole. So you need to solve for that, and I'm starting to solve for that as well.

Lenny (00:50:30):
Yeah. Okay. Enough about the downsides. Overall, it's pretty amazing making hundreds of thousands of dollars writing an email once a week/twice a week. So just to wrap up on that, I'm curious, where do you think this goes long term for you? And then I want to talk about just what it takes to be successful, but before there, do you think this goes long term?

Gergely Orosz (00:50:50):
I stopped making long term plans, because three years ago you would've asked me what I wanted to do, and I was like, "I want to be, I don't know, a manager of managers." And then I became one. And then [inaudible 00:51:01] what is my dream? I would've been like, "It's a stretch, but maybe I want to be a site lead." And I didn't become one per se, but I never thought of writing a newsletter, or now writing a successful newsletter. So I'm going with the flow. I'm seeing this less, by the way, as a newsletter or creator, or creator economy as people like to see it. I see this as a business, and I'm trying to put on that business hat. I'm building a one-person business. I want to make it sustainable, I want to make it successful, and I find that this thinking really helps me detach as well. I can actually enjoy my weekends as opposed to thinking, "I need to write this, or I need to write that." So I also want to make it work for me.

Gergely Orosz (00:51:40):
And I'm not married to the idea of, it always needs to be a newsletter, et cetera. Right now it is, but where I see us going is, I'll keep building the business, I'll keep playing to my strength, which is I love talking with people, I love writing [inaudible 00:51:56] I love software engineering. So this is a great format, but over time it might shift. So I'm keeping my options open. And what I've learned from this journey is, you need to create time for that spark to come. So one of my goals for next few years is to not spend 50 hours a week on a newsletter, which I'm doing right now, but spend 20, and then maybe take a few weeks off and have that spark come. Because the reality is, this newsletter only came because I gave myself six months of unpaid... I'm not going for work, I didn't ask for any LinkedIn emails. And the idea came and the inspiration came and the motivation came.

Lenny (00:52:36):
There's a lot of similarities with my approach. I don't think too far long term. I have no idea what's going to happen. I just take it to... I see where pull is coming from, and if it feels like an interesting opportunity and something that I'd be excited to work on, I explore it, like the podcast for example. And on that point, I will say, once you find that you can spend maybe 20 hours on a newsletter, I guarantee you'll find more work to fill that gap, because that's what I've been doing.

Gergely Orosz (00:53:00):
Yeah. And one last thing to touch on, you said something really important [inaudible 00:53:06] pull, and I want to double down on that. One of the biggest, best things about doing what we do when you're in charge of your time is, you can double down on pulls. So [inaudible 00:53:18] Uber, like I said, my plan was, I'll write this book for six months. Two months in, I just put a draft [inaudible 00:53:24] a really long blog post about mobile engineering, and I got a ton of messages, a lot. I usually used to get like three or four messages on Twitter per day. I got 20 in an hour, people saying, "Can I read the draft?" And I was like, that's interesting. I just felt this pull, of this huge interest of people caring about this. It was this really long blog post about mobile engineering at scale, and someone suggested on a private message, "You could probably turn this into a ebook." And I was like, that's a good idea, because it's a really long blog post. So I said, "It's going to be an ebook, and it'll be pay what you want." And then people started to buy it. And I was like, that's interesting.

Gergely Orosz (00:53:57):
So I didn't have much else to do, so I was able to double down. I said, for the next two months, I'm going to write this book, because it seems there's an interest in it. And [inaudible 00:54:07] I turned it into a book that was free for two months, but I got sponsorship. The point was, I was able to double down on this pull. And same thing with the newsletter. So we're going to talk about how I got the first few thousand subscribers, but the point was, I was able to double down on something that I felt like, this is super interesting, I never expected that people would care about building a large mobile app, more than a few hundred people. Turns out they do. Thousands do.

Lenny (00:54:30):
Let's actually jump to that. Let's talk about just how to get started, for folks that are like, "This is cool. I want to do a newsletter." Let's talk about just how you got started briefly, and then what you think it takes to be successful in the life of a newsletter person. So how'd you actually get your first thousand subscribers?

Gergely Orosz (00:54:51):
I'll tell the story that is kind of true, and people will think it's amazing, and also the real deal behind it.

Lenny (00:54:57):
Okay, great.

Gergely Orosz (00:54:58):
I announced my newsletter, I told people, "I'm going to go full time on this." I had maybe 10,000 Twitter followers and, I don't know, maybe 1,000 on LinkedIn or something that. And people started signing up the next day. I had 100 subscribers in the first day before I published anything. And within six weeks, when I published my [inaudible 00:55:15] I had 1,000 paid subscribers. And this sounds like a fairytale. And if you do this, I guarantee you're not going to get the same results. In fact, you'll probably see way smaller numbers.

Gergely Orosz (00:55:25):
What I didn't tell is that there was at least six years of accidental work behind this. I started a blog six years before... Actually, I've always been blogging since I graduated. I had this personal blog where I just published all sorts of random things about software engineering, but it was really... Sometimes it was about an app that I published, sometimes it was a problem that I came across. It was is all over the place. And I got fed up with this, the blog wasn't going anywhere, and I was just writing for myself, by the way, but I didn't how it was just all over the place.

Gergely Orosz (00:55:56):
And I said, "I'm going to start a blog, it'll be about software engineering and I'll call it The Pragmatic Engineer." I bought the domain, and I read this blog post from Jeff Atwood, who's the founder of Stack Overflow, and back in 2010, or I think in 2007 when I was still in college, he had the most popular blog on the internet for software engineers. It was called Coding Horror, and all the software engineers I knew read it and were drinking it. It was next level wisdom every single week, twice [inaudible 00:56:26] a week. You read it as well?

Lenny (00:56:29):
[inaudible 00:56:29] Yeah. I used to be an engineer, and I was all up in that. And I think Coding Horror came from a... I forget the book, but there's a book with that graphic.

Gergely Orosz (00:56:36):
There's a book, and there's a graphic. Yeah. And he wrote a post which really stuck with me for years. He said, how to be famous on the internet. He said, there's three simple steps. One, write a blog post. Two, do this three times a week. Three, do it for two years. And I guarantee, if you do this, you're going to be famous. And I always thought it's kind of ironic, but the more I read it, the more I thought he actually means something with it. And when I started this blog, The Pragmatic Engineer, I said, "I'm tired of my old blog being all over the place, and there's no focus, and no-one really cares about it. I'm going to do what Jeff Atwood said. I'm going to publish... Okay, it's not going to be twice a week, but every two weeks I'm going to publish an article, and I'll do it for a year." So I started to do this. I published six blog posts about software engineering, going into topics that I [inaudible 00:57:25] research and all that, and then I gave up.

Gergely Orosz (00:57:27):
And I'm saying this because I kind of gave up, and I left it for a few months, but then something interesting happened. I had a huge traffic spike, and it crashed my shared hosting at the time. And it came from a site called Hacker News that I [inaudible 00:57:41] heard about, and people were discussing my posts, and they were adding a lot of things. And I was like, that's interesting. People care about what I wrote six months ago.

Lenny (00:57:49):
What was that post, by the way?

Gergely Orosz (00:57:50):
It was called, "A comment is an invitation for refactoring." I wrote my view that if there's a comment in a code, that means that comment should be deleted and you should just refactor the whole thing. And it exploded on Hacker News. Some people called me an idiot, some people called me absolute wisdom, and it was these two crowds battling it out. And I was like, wow, I actually made software engineers in Silicon Valley argue about my stuff. I saw some of the [inaudible 00:58:17] people, some really high [inaudible 00:58:18] people were really going for [inaudible 00:58:21]. So that's when I thought [inaudible 00:58:23] my writings, some people might read it, it's not guaranteed.

Gergely Orosz (00:58:26):
And I started to write on that blog once every few months, depending on my mood, but I never stopped doing it. And I partially did it [inaudible 00:58:35] always hoped that it would get onto this site called Hacker News. But by the way, for a while, I didn't even know you could submit it, so I never submitted my own things. But the other thing was, I just kind of liked it, and I had this habit, and over years... I had this blog from 2015. For six years I was writing that blog, and in the last year... When I worked at Uber, on the side I wrote about my work, in terms of the things that I could write about, not about the details that we did, but some of the learnings [inaudible 00:59:02] for example, distributed systems. And more and more of these posts just started to just pop up on Hacker News. People would either submit it, or sometimes when I submitted it, it would just do well. And I was thinking, so people... I started to get this validation, people care about what I write.

Gergely Orosz (00:59:16):
And to question of the success of the newsletter, by the time I launched a newsletter, I had a lot of posts that a lot of software engineers read, and there was a very famous post about performance management, how to do performance reviews. I wrote one about the tri-modal nature of software engineering salaries, where I observed that there's three different tiers that are... There's big tech and there's local companies. And I think what happened is, when I announced that I'm going to write this newsletter, I also put it on the blog. A lot of people realize that they... "I've been reading this Pragmatic Engineer, I don't know who is behind it, but I like it. Let me sign up. I do want to get an email every week, instead of the things that were every now and then."

Gergely Orosz (00:59:56):
So there was years of work, and I wish I could tell you how to build a successful newsletter, but the best advice I have is still what Jeff Atwood does, except I have less conviction. But if you start writing, and you do it regularly, two things will happen. First of all, you're going to [inaudible 01:00:11] you write for yourself and you keep improving, you'll be a better writer. That's for sure. If you're lucky or if you're right about stuff, you might start to attract people who think similarly. So step one is get started. Step two is keep it up. And my suggestion is [inaudible 01:00:26] for yourself. The weird thing is, until I started my newsletter, I never thought I would turn this ever into a business, but it always felt rewarding. So I never... If you're starting out writing a newsletter to do what I'm doing one day, it might work out. But interesting enough, I never even thought that this was an opportunity.

Lenny (01:00:48):
So people listening to this that are thinking about, should I explore this life? If you think about your story, you wrote a book, you blogged for a while before this, you worked at Uber for a number of years. In a sense, it comes across a little bit like, there's no way I can be successful if that's the background I need to have. I have to have written things and worked at an awesome tech company. What advice do you give folks that are coming to you being like, "Gergely, should I start a newsletter? Does it make sense for me?" Do you need the background that you have, do you think?

Gergely Orosz (01:01:21):
Don't forget that when I started my blog, I didn't have any of this.

Lenny (01:01:24):
And this is while you were at Uber. This is before you started the newsletter.

Gergely Orosz (01:01:28):
It was before I was at Uber. So I was maybe at Skyscanner, or maybe at Skype, but I was even blogging before. I was talking to conferences before. So my advice really would be, if you're thinking of a newsletter or something similar, start teaching and sharing what you know and what you're observing. This could be a newsletter, this could be a YouTube video, this could be going to meetup. Actually, ten years ago I went to a lot of meetups where I presented all sorts [inaudible 01:01:54] I met a lot of cool people. I would say, share your knowledge one way or the other. And as you're doing it, you're going to learn a lot more.

Gergely Orosz (01:02:01):
So what I find... This is true, when I was a manager, we had to set goals, and I told people there's two types of goals you can set. One is [inaudible 01:02:12] people set this goal, I want to be promoted the next thing, or I want to lead this big project. And those are bad goals, because it's not in your control. So setting a goal that I want to have a successful newsletter with, I don't know, 20,000 subscribers, that's a goal where you're not in charge. A good goal is what you can do. So a good goal for example is, I want to learn this new language in the next year, which I'm going to spend time on, or I want to leave work at 5:00 PM on Fridays to be home with family. So set those goals that you can control.

Gergely Orosz (01:02:41):
And this is how actually my blog started initially. My goal was, I want to write once a month. And I did that for a while, and I was proud about that. Or whenever I learn something, I actually want to share it every now and then. So I would say set those goals, and the rest will come, probably. Again, don't get me wrong, I'm not trying to talk people out of doing it. But for me, a lot of this was luck. And the other thing that I would suggest is be curious, and look at your professional career as well. One thing that definitely helped me is getting pedigree. I come from a small country, from a really good university which no-one knows about, but I didn't grow up in let's say Silicon Valley, so I actually made a subconscious point to try to work my way up. And after I got to let's say JPMorgan in London, I was pretty picky of where I would go next. So that's why, when Skype came along [inaudible 01:03:36] this is great. Everyone knows Skype, I love Skype. And it was same thing with Uber.

Gergely Orosz (01:03:40):
So especially these days, people would not pay nearly as much attention to me if I worked at Small Parts Limited. So there's that part as well. So you need to manage some of these things, figure out what you want to do. For a long time, I pretty much thought that I just want to climb the corporate ladder and prove that I'm good enough at all these companies. I was just doing all this stuff on the side. It's interesting how it's now flipped, and now doing these things, this is my main thing, which used to be my side project.

Gergely Orosz (01:04:07):
And I guess one last advice is, do some side projects. All of this starts as a side project. At work, no-one's really going to appreciate that you're doing a newsletter or this or that. Try stuff on the side, assuming that you have time. Or if you don't have time, try to make time. Because I feel a lot of what we're doing is pretty entrepreneurial, and the only way you're going to get these muscles, if you start some small things.

Lenny (01:04:31):
You talk about the pedigree being important. I think there's also an even deeper point, that you actually need real experience doing real things that scaled and worked and mattered and worked with amazing people, to actually build a foundation to write about, share wisdom from. And that's really important. There's a lot of people starting newsletters and tweeting who haven't done much and don't have a lot of real life experience to share. And I think that's the core of a lot of what we do, is it needs to be based on real things that worked and that you've learned, or that you have access to other people who have learned these things.

Gergely Orosz (01:05:06):
I would say that, but one thing that I'll double down [inaudible 01:05:09] that's a really good observation is, if you're serious, like one day I will want to write a book or a newsletter, it's kind of the same thing, or teach people about stuff, look at the people that you look up to that you actually trust. Maybe it's me a bit or maybe it's you, but it's more likely people like Kent Beck, for example. He's the creator of TDD, and he's written a lot of books. He's one of my favorite people, I think he's coming up 50 or 60 [inaudible 01:05:36] if he listens to this, sorry if... I don't want [inaudible 01:05:38] seem old, but what I love about Kent Beck, is he's been in the middle of it. He has always worked in the industry, and that he wrote about it. But for example, I think he invented or he was a co-inventor of... Was it TDD or extreme program... Anyway, one of these methodologies.

Gergely Orosz (01:05:58):
And then [inaudible 01:05:58] went to work at Facebook. He took a title cut to be a software engineer, and then he hosts the TDD workshop, the test driven development workshop, and no-one showed up at Facebook. And Facebook did no testing, which went against all commercial wisdom. And he took that risk joining this company where he could have been... People would've knelt down to him anywhere else, but he went to this company where he just wanted to learn. He's this lifelong learner. He's right now writing a book. But what I think [inaudible 01:06:26] if you want to be someone who people listen to, yes, do cool and interesting stuff, push yourself to get into places that do these interesting things.

Gergely Orosz (01:06:33):
That's how, when I went to Uber in 2016, it was one of the highest regarded places back in 2016, and in 2017 it was the other way around. But back in 2016, people were turning down Facebook and Google offers to go at Uber, which we all thought would change the world. So you do need to get into those teams that are doing interesting stuff, prove that you can do that, and you'll have a lot more interesting stories to share, that's for sure.

Lenny (01:06:59):
If you had to boil down advice for how to be successful in this life of a newsletter, you had to boil it down to just one or two key pieces of advice, what would you say?

Gergely Orosz (01:07:10):
One is habit of depth in the field, whatever field you do. So this might mean that I think... I don't want to say that if you don't have experience, don't start one, but it's kind of true. So become an expert somewhere, somehow, before you start, because you'll be a lot more credible. I think there's no shortage of reporters and journalists who don't know about stuff, but they can interview people, but that doesn't give anything extra, and I think people feel that.

Gergely Orosz (01:07:38):
So I would say choose a field that you're going to be good at. And you can start on the side, doing this. Assuming you have something, you're someone with experience in the industry or you have insights, wisdom, observations to share, start doing so, in whatever format. I do newsletters. There's actually YouTube, a lot of people are becoming pretty successful on YouTube sharing their thing. Three, have a cadence and stick to it, to some extent, because you do need to keep repeating it. And then four, don't be afraid to try out new things. A good example of a person who did these is Steve Yegge. Steve Yegge is... Have you heard of Steve Yegge?

Lenny (01:08:17):
Yeah. He wrote some epic long...

Gergely Orosz (01:08:19):
He used to work at Amazon, and then at Google he wrote this internal email about platforms, about how Amazon is great at platforms and Google is terrible. And he was really well known at Google, because he wrote stuff inside Google. So he's experienced, knows a lot of stuff, and then he quit Google and he started to do a podcast that's on YouTube. You could check it out, it's called Stevey's Podcast. And what he did is, every week he recorded an episode and he talked about a bunch of his learnings, a lot of stuff, and he was pretty clear up front when he started the first one, he said, "What I'm doing is, I'm going to do this for six months and I'll see if it sticks, see if people care about it or people watch it."

Gergely Orosz (01:08:55):
Now, this guy had a lot of experience, really fun [inaudible 01:08:59] I think it's really fun to listen to. And in the end, it was I think successful. It got a couple thousand or maybe even 10,000 subscribers, but it wasn't this rocket ship. And I think what he did, he just stopped after six months, and he actually started head of engineering at Sourcegraph, he actually went back [inaudible 01:09:15] industry. But what I love about this, it shows that you cannot guarantee having success, but you can do what he did, which is start something, do a cadence, see if it sticks. If not, either pivot or do something else. I feel the world is kind of about that as well.

Gergely Orosz (01:09:30):
If you think about... Take a step back of, what is a successful newsletter? What is a successful podcast? What is a successful YouTube channel? And it's stuff that's interesting. It's either entertaining or educational. But all of these things, you can't really put a finger on. If you watch YouTube, Mr. Beast is someone who you probably came across, I actually like watching his videos and [inaudible 01:09:56] how good he does it, but it's not something you can [inaudible 01:09:59] anyone would have written in a book. So there is a sense of trying to understand what people care about, and a good way to understand is either experiment or observe or just try out stuff.

Lenny (01:10:12):
This is great. I feel like I can boil this down even further from everything you just said, which is, build depth in an area, then write a blog post twice a week for two years, and good things will happen.

Gergely Orosz (01:10:25):
I'm pretty sure. And here's an interesting thought as well, just for closure. I was talking with someone on why my newsletter is so successful. It's really successful, and I honestly don't know why. And this person told me something interesting. This is a person who had a really successful YouTube channel with about 200,000 subscribers, so more than my newsletter. And he said this. He's like, "What I noticed is, you started your blog in 2015, 2016, and I started my YouTube channel in 2019 or something like that. And on YouTube, there's so much quality, there's super high great productions, everyone is doing YouTube." And he said, "You know what I don't see? I don't see many blogs that are writing in depth stuff regularly. I feel everyone went over to YouTube or TikTok. So there is the other angle of the medium." And I'm saying this, not [inaudible 01:11:16] but it might be an advantage. These days, fewer people write, because I think a lot of people find it hard and more people will do videos. And you can take advantage of some of these shifts, which might be good or bad.

Gergely Orosz (01:11:27):
So if you're going to be a really well known person on YouTube, you might get more people watching you, but you'll have a lot more competition. And the last thing is that for me, writing, especially with software engineers, it's really efficient, because I can scan through it. I don't like YouTube videos, especially for learning about stuff, because I can't even scan through the whole thing. It's just really time consuming.

Gergely Orosz (01:11:47):
So I think, decide if you want to do entertainment, which for these podcast listeners, I don't think that's in the question, you're competing with the likes of Spotify and Netflix. Education, which is a little bit more dry, but it's really useful. Or edutainment, which is entertaining education. And once you figure that out, either if it's education or edutainment, you can figure out what format might work both for the medium and for you. And at end of the day, you need to enjoy it. I personally have learned over time to love writing. I love being in the zone. So for me it's not really work, but it's fun. And once you find that thing, whatever that might be, it just makes it easier.

Lenny (01:12:27):
Gergely, it's always so fun talking about newsletter stuff. I don't have many people to talk about this life with. I hope this was useful to people who are exploring this path, thinking about it, or even the different creator path. Just two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out or learn more? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Gergely Orosz (01:12:45):
You can find me at pragmaticengineer.com. There is a bunch of stuff listed there from the Twitter, LinkedIn, my talent collective, some of the companies that I invest in, et cetera. Everything's there. And you can also sign up to my newsletter. Listeners being useful to me... If you work in tech, consider signing up to my newsletter. I always tell people we're a complimentary newsletter. If you work in product or have an interest in product [inaudible 01:13:11] newsletter is an awesome choice. With software engineering management, it goes the other way. And it's not just... People are telling me when they're data scientists or even product folks, sometimes they get some value out of it.

Gergely Orosz (01:13:23):
I write this column called the scoop every Thursday. If you hear of any interesting scoop happening, especially relevant for techies, this might be some change in the workplace, like your company is just rolling out agile [inaudible 01:13:36] team at Twitter did, feel free to ping me, just a short search for sending scoop to the Pragmatic Engineer. I treat everything as anonymous, so you can tell me interesting stuff. I'm typically interested in the stuff that you might not read about in the traditional media, but us techies really care about.

Gergely Orosz (01:13:51):
And finally, if you work at Google and you want anonymity to talk to me, just ping me, because one of my next articles will be Google's engineering culture. I wrote one about Facebook, one about Amazon, and I tried to talk with mostly software engineers to get a sense of how these companies work from a software engineer and engineer manager perspective.

Lenny (01:14:11):
Awesome. I hope this comes out before that post comes out, but if not, then enjoy that post. Gergely, thank you so much for being here. This was awesome. And maybe we'll do a V2 as things continue to grow.

Gergely Orosz (01:14:23):
Awesome. It was great being here, Lenny.

Lenny (01:14:27):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review, as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Gustav Söderström (00:00:00):
The internet started with curation, often user curation. So you took something, some good like people or books or music, and you digitize it and you put it online and then you ask users to curate it. And that was your Facebook, Spotify, and so forth. And then after a while, the world switched from curation to recommendation, where instead of people doing that work, you had algorithms. And that was a big change that required us and others to actually rethink the entire user experience and sometimes the business model as well. And I think what we're entering now is we're going from your curation to recommendation to generation. And I suspect it will be as big of a shift that you will eventually have to rethink your products. We have to rethink the user interface and the experience for recommendation first era. And so what does that mean in the generative era? No one really knows yet.

Lenny (00:00:47):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hard one experiences building and growing today's most successful products. Today, my guest is Gustav Söderström. Gustav is a product legend and he's now the co-president, chief product and chief technology officer at Spotify, where he's responsible for Spotify's global product and technology strategy and oversees the product design data and engineering teams at the company. I've had Gustav on my wish list of dream guests to have on this podcast since the day I launched the podcast and I'm so happy we made it happen.

Lenny (00:01:19):
In our conversation, we dig into what Gustav has learned about taking big bets and what to do when they don't work out, how Spotify moved away from squads and how they structure their teams now, how AI is already impacting their product, and also the future of music generated by AI. Also, why all great products need to pull some magic trick, how accurately succession represents Swedish business culture, and his hilarious analogy of peeing in your pants. Enjoy this episode with Gustav Söderström after a short word from our sponsors.

Lenny (00:01:51):
This episode is brought to you by Microsoft Clarity, a free easy to use tool that captures how real people are actually using your site. You can watch live session replays to discover where users are breezing through your flow and where they struggle. You can view instant heat maps to see what parts of your page users are engaging with and what content they're ignoring. You can also pinpoint what's bothering your users with really cool frustration metrics like rage clicks and dead clicks and much more. If you listen to this podcast, you know how often we talk about the importance of knowing your users, and by seeing how users truly experience your product, you can identify product opportunities, conversion wins, and find big gaps between how you imagine people using your product and how they actually use it.

Lenny (00:02:33):
Microsoft Clarity makes it all possible with a simple yet incredibly powerful set of features. You'll be blown away by how easy Clarity is to use and it's completely free forever. You'll never run into traffic limits or be forced to upgrade to a paid version. It also works across both apps and websites. Stop guessing, get Clarity. Check out Clarity at clarity.microsoft.com.

Lenny (00:02:59):
This episode is brought to you by Eppo. Eppo is a next generation AB testing platform built by Airbnb alums for modern growth teams. Companies like DraftKings, Zapier, ClickUp, Twitch, and Cameo rely on Eppo to power their experiments. Wherever you work, running experiments is increasingly essential, but there are no commercial tools that integrate with a modern grow team stack. This leads to waste of time building internal tools or trying to run your own experiments through a clunky marketing tool. When I was at Airbnb, one of the things that I loved most about working there was our experimentation platform, where I was able to slice and dice data by device types, country, user stage. Eppo does all that and more delivering results quickly, avoiding knowing prolonged analytic cycles, and helping you easily get to the root cause of any issue you discover.

Lenny (00:03:44):
Eppo lets you go beyond basic click-through metrics and instead use your north star metrics like activation, retention, subscription, and payments. Eppo supports test on front end, on the backend, email marketing, even machine learning claims. Check out Eppo at getE-P-P-O.com. That's geteppo.com. And 10X, your experiment velocity.

Lenny (00:04:08):
Gustav, welcome to the podcast.

Gustav Söderström (00:04:11):
Thanks for having me, Lenny. Pleasure to be here.

Lenny (00:04:13):
It's my pleasure to have you on. So at this point, you've been at Spotify for over 14 years, which is a rare feat in the tech world, and you've held a lot of different roles while you've been at Spotify. Can you just start off by giving us a sense of what these various roles and what you've done over the years at Spotify and then just what are you up to these days? What are you responsible for now?

Gustav Söderström (00:04:33):
So I came into Spotify in early 2009, late 2008. And my job then, I had been an entrepreneur, started some of my own companies in the, back then, very, very early feature phone, smartphone space. So I had a bunch of knowledge there. I had sold the company to Yahoo in the mobile space. I worked there for a while. I came back to Sweden and then I met through a mutual friend, Daniel Ek, the CEO and co-founder of Spotify. And they had built the desktop product already, the free streaming desktop product, and it was amazing and I could try it, but they needed someone to figure out what to do with mobile. And because I had been an entrepreneur in that space, I got that job.

Gustav Söderström (00:05:20):
So my job was to head up mobile for Spotify and figure out what the mobile offering would be, which was a challenge because, obviously, Spotify desktop was a free on-demand streaming application and back then, specifically with edge networks, you couldn't really stream at all in real time. The performance wasn't there and also you couldn't fund that with an ads model. So it was a product and business model innovation that was a lot of fun. So that's how I started. Then after a few years, I took on all of product development for Spotify. And then a few years later, I actually took on the technology responsibility, the CTO role for Spotify as well. And recently, my official title is co-president of Spotify together with Alex Nordstrom. So we run half of the company each. I run the product and technology side and he runs for the business and content side. So that's the super fast version.

Gustav Söderström (00:06:20):
Aside from getting more responsibilities taking on the technology department, it has been the same job by title. I've always reported to Daniel, but because Spotify's grown so much every six to 12 months, it's been starting at a new company. First, it was sort of a Swedish Nordic challenge and then it was a European challenge and then it was getting into the US and then we became a public company. So it's as if I had jumped around between a lot of jobs actually, even though it was largely the same title and role.

Lenny (00:06:55):
Your story makes me think of the classic be careful what you're good at because you end up taking on more and more. And clearly, you've been given more and more responsibility over the years and so clearly things are going well and you're doing well.

Lenny (00:07:08):
Shifting a little bit. So you're on my podcast currently. You actually have your own podcast, which was this limited series on the product story of Spotify, which I listened to and loved, and it's surreal to listen to your voice in real time because I've been listening to that recently in preparation for this conversation. Two questions, just what made you decide to launch your own podcast knowing you had a full-time job and a lot going on and the production value for your podcast was very high for what I could tell? And then two, just what did you learn from that experience in terms of the product you ended up a building and just empathizing with the podcast creator side of?

Gustav Söderström (00:07:41):
There were a bunch of different reasons why I did that. One is, and not a small one, I think, like you, I love writing and I have this secret creator dream in me. I used to write blog posts a long time ago and I write internally a lot. You can't write that much externally when you work at a company like this.

Lenny (00:08:01):
Yeah.

Gustav Söderström (00:08:02):
But I love writing and talking and presenting. So there was certainly that. And then no small part was, from a product point of view, to empathize with one of our main constituents, the podcast creator. I'm, unfortunately, not a great musician. I try to play instruments and so forth, but I don't have any records. I don't sing very well. But I decided to make a podcast and that taught me a huge amount about what it's like to be a creator, creating different styles of podcast.

Gustav Söderström (00:08:33):
For example, we wanted to do a higher production cost podcast with music and then right away you run into a bunch of problems as Spotify is actually pretty well positioned to solve, but still, it's really hard to have music in a podcast from a rights perspective. So you understand all these problems that podcasters have and you can be better at solving them. But the biggest benefit and the real reason for doing the public podcast was that I have actually done an internal podcast through a hack where we could gate the podcast-only employees. And I tried to figure out internally how to build more culture around Spotify and help define for new employees and existing employees, who we are, the mistakes we did, the successes we had, and how we think about strategy specifically in product strategy because we were quite well known externally for technology and the squads and all of these things, not so much for product strategy.

Gustav Söderström (00:09:36):
And because I love storytelling more than Google Docs, I decided to do an internal podcast and I went around and I interviewed actually Daniel's direct reports. So the CMO, the CHRO and CFO. And just ask them about a bunch of stuff. And the idea was to make them more approachable for employees because I felt listening to podcasts, even these people that have no idea who I am because I've never met them, I feel like I know them, I feel like I know how they think and I just like them much more. So the secret idea was, what if you could get to know your leaders much better than you do through occasional meetings or some town hall? So I did that internally, and because I'm a product person, we ended up talking a lot about product and product strategy. And people internally really like that.

Gustav Söderström (00:10:26):
So next time, the question was, what if people that don't even work at Spotify yet could feel as if they knew people at Spotify? That'd be great because most leaders in most companies are very opaque and appear as some otherworldly creatures that aren't really real, I think, when you see them in business papers or something. So what if you have heard them talk for an hour or so? So that was general idea. So a combination of recruitment tool, sharing more about how we think about product strategy and just because I think it was a lot of fun. I got to interview a bunch of smart and interesting people both externally and internally.

Lenny (00:11:09):
Did it have the effect that you were hoping after looking back?

Gustav Söderström (00:11:12):
I think it did. The podcast did well and, no, we did not give it our own promotion. I had to compete as everyone else, which also gives you a lot of empathy for the problem of like, okay, now you have a product, what about user acquisition? How do you actually get people to listen to it? So it did achieve what I wanted in the sense that we have this thing called intradays where especially in the past few years when we've hired a lot, we actually fly people to Stockholm for an onboarding session to learn about Spotify. And the leadership is on stage, talking about what they do and the departments and strategy and so forth. And it's very common that people come and tell me that, "Oh, I listened to this podcast or this and the episode and it's at least one of the key reasons why I joined or sometimes the reason why I joined." So it's anecdotal, but it may be in the many tens of people, at least, who have said it. So that seems to work.

Lenny (00:12:12):
That's really interesting. Just again, and this comes up a few times on the podcast, is just the power of content in all these different ways for hiring for culture building. And it sounds like the original goal was just internally build this clinic culture and strategy.

Gustav Söderström (00:12:24):
That was the original goal, make senior leadership more approachable and reduce the distance and then also share more of the thinking in an entertaining way rather than just through docs that people end up not reading.

Lenny (00:12:38):
I love that. So I was listening to it, as I said, and what was really interesting is I think episode four was actually all about AI, and I think your first attempts at leveraging machine learning in AI within Spotify. And I think that's what led to Discover Weekly and a few other tools. And that was years ago. And it's interesting listening to it now where AI is, again, a huge deal. And so I'm curious very tactically on the product team what you advise product managers and product teams on how to think about AI in their product thinking and also just in their day-to-day work.

Gustav Söderström (00:13:12):
I can give a few examples there and I don't know that we're more sophisticated than anyone else, but we'll be doing at least the traditional machine learning for quite a long time. And I think in the podcast, I think I talked about the journey of the internet in stages. And one way to think about it is that the internet started with curation of the user curation. So you took something, some good, like people or books or music and you digitize it and you put it online, and then you ask users to curate it. And that was your Facebook, Spotify and so forth. And then after a while, the world switched from curation to recommendation, where instead of people doing that work, you had algorithms. And that was a big change that required us and others to actually rethink the entire user experience and sometimes the business model as well.

Gustav Söderström (00:14:04):
And I think what we're entering now is we're going from your curation to recommendation to generation. And I suspect it will be as big of a shift that you will eventually have to rethink your products. So that's one lens. So I tend to talk to my teams about, even though it's all machine learning, I ask them to think of this as something completely different. The recommendation error was one type of machine learning. The generation error is a different type, so don't think of it as just more of the same, think of it as something actually completely new instead. And what we learned in ... Well, a few things. So if you look at this new era of large language models and the fusion models and so forth, there are two types of applications. As I said for the recommendation error, we had to rethink the user interface and the experience for recommendation first error.

Gustav Söderström (00:14:57):
And so what does that mean in the generative area? No one really knows yet. As usual, there are a bunch of iterative improvements. So we use these large language models to improve our recommendations. You can have bigger vectors that can have more cultural knowledge. You can use it for safety classification on podcasts that no one has listened to yet and so forth. So there's lots of obvious improvements and we're doing those. But so far, we've only really done one real generative product in the hard definition, which is a product that couldn't have existed without generative AI, and that is the AI DJ. So that's a concept that we've been thinking about for a very long time. And the AI DJ is you press a button, a digitized person, there's a real person named X, digitized X. So he's now an AI, comes on and talks to you about music that you like and suggests music, and you can listen to it. And if you don't like it, you can just call him back and he says, "Okay, now, let's listen to something maybe from a few summers ago," or "Here's some new stuff that were trending yesterday in The Last of Us episode or something like that."

Gustav Söderström (00:16:10):
So that product couldn't have existed without generative AI, both generating the voice and generating the content of what the voice says. So you can have individualized, personalized voice at the scale of half a billion people. And so we had the use case we have seen for many, many years. Sometimes people call it the radio use case. We called it the zero intent use case internally when you actually don't know what you want to listen to at all.

Gustav Söderström (00:16:40):
Spotify wasn't that good. Spotify was good when, at least roughly, you knew the use case of what you want to do, if it was a workout or dinner. We had lots of options for all of those. But if you really didn't know at all, it was hard to open Spotify and stare at it. And people used to say longingly that this was the one thing that radio was good at. Radio was quite bad, to be honest. I mean, it's not personalized to you at all. It's not on demand. You come in in the middle of things, it's actually terrible in many ways. But people still often say that there was something good about it. And I think that's something was the fact that you had a knob and you could just switch between contexts. It's like no, boring, boring, boring, boring, okay, this is good.

Gustav Söderström (00:17:23):
And Spotify never had that mode of, I don't know what I want, but I want to cycle through things until I find something that I like. And I think with the AI DJ, that's actually the use case we managed to solve. So X comes on and says, "I'm going to suggest something to you that you can listen to." And if you like it, you can keep listening, but if you don't like it, you bring him back again and you change channel. And for one reason or another, we tried to solve that for many times for a long time, but just starting to play a random song without any context as to why you would hear this, it just never worked. So that was our first foray into a product that couldn't exist before. And I think to your question of principles around that, there are a few pretty distinct principles that we've learned.

Gustav Söderström (00:18:09):
One that I really like that is not my principle at all, I think it is straight from Chris Dixon, is the principle of fault-tolerant user interfaces. So I can't say how many times during the early machine learning era when we said we're moving from curation to recommendation. I saw a design sketch that was a single big play button because clearly that is the simplest user interface you can do, but if you don't understand the performance of your machine learning, you can't design for it. The quality of your machine learning, if you're going to have a single play button, needs to be literally 100% or zero prediction error, and that's never the case. So let's say that you have a one in five hits, four out of five things are done, then you need a UI that probably at least shows five things at the same time on screen. So you have a one in five of something being relevant on screen.

Gustav Söderström (00:19:03):
So you need to understand the performance of your machine learning to design for it. It needs to be fault tolerant and often you need an escape hatch for the user. So you make a prediction. But if you were wrong, it needs to be super easy for the user say, "No, you're wrong, I want to go to my library or to this or to that." So we have that principle of having fault-tolerant user interface and a user interface that corresponds to the current performance of your algorithms. And I think that is going to be true for generative machine learning as well. I think a very clear example actually is Mid Journey. If you think about the early Mid Journey user interface inside the Discord channel, actually generating an image was very, very slow.

Gustav Söderström (00:19:48):
It took a long time to generate high-quality image and they could have built the silver button thing where you put in a prompt, you wait for minutes, you get an image, and I think one out of four times, it's going to be bad. So you would've been disappointed three out of four times and it's a minute each, so like four minutes later, you'd be, "This is a shitty product." What they did was they generated four simultaneous low-res images very quickly and you could say, "So apparently, their performance was probably one in four, that's why they showed four and not six." And so one in four was usually pretty good. You click that one and either continue to iterate or scale it up. So that's also an example of, I think, people understanding where the performance of generative AI was when they built the UI. So that's something that I would be inspired by.

Gustav Söderström (00:20:37):
And for the AI DJ specifically, another principle is to try to avoid this urge of just wanting to show off the technology and then have this voice that talk and talk and talk and talk. You have to remember that people came there for the music. So the principle for the AI DJ coming from the team, by the way, this was a bottoms-up product actually, it required a lot of support. We actually acquired big companies and so forth to be able to build it. But the idea had been built by teams bottom up. So the principle there was literally to do as little as possible and get out of the way. And I think that was really helpful. It's not telling you what the weather is and what happened in the news and going on and on and on about this band. It is trying to get you to the music and I think that's why it's working because it is working very well for us.

Lenny (00:21:24):
I love this distinction between recommendation and generation. And this begs the question of, there's this trend that I imagine you're seeing of people autogenerating music using artists catalog. There's this Drake and The Weeknd thing that came out a week or two ago. Where do you think this ends up going and how do you think artists adjust to this world where music can just be autogenerated? This play button is all of it is generated versus just like the DJ in between the songs.

Gustav Söderström (00:21:53):
First, big caveat, this is just super early. No one knows anything about how this is going to play out or the legal landscape and so forth, but I think it's going to have a lot of impact. And I think if we talk about two things, one is what it could do for music, the other is the right situation, and if rights-holders are getting compensated and so forth. So we talk about the first thing in isolation. I think an interesting example is right about when I grew up, Avicii came along. And it's interesting to think about because Avicii was not really considered by the existing music industry as a real artist because he couldn't really play an instrument and he couldn't sing, and he was just sitting with this computer in this DAW, digital audio workstation. And so it wasn't really considered real music. And I think now all of us consider it very real music and that he had tremendous real musical talent.

Gustav Söderström (00:22:51):
So I think right now, we're probably in the face where people say this isn't real music and it's somehow fake. I think the way to think about these diffusion models if and when they get good enough at generating music is probably the same like an instrument. It's just a much more powerful instrument and we'll probably see a new type of creator that wasn't proficient at any instrument and they couldn't assemble a full orchestra and do the thing that they had in their head and they can now generate very new things. I also think, by the way, that there is this distinction between AI music and real music that doesn't exist. For sure, very talented real musicians are using AI to get better and to help create new ideas. So that distinction doesn't really exist. It's all going to be AI. The question is what percentage, which makes the problem harder because you can't talk about if it should exist or not.

Gustav Söderström (00:23:50):
You have to talk about what percentage should exist and who gets to use it or not. But I think the way to think about it is probably as an instrument and that could help create a huge amount of art. And I think this is not news to you who probably use these things a lot, but I think if you don't use these generative models, there is the perception that you tell it to create a hit and you will get that. That's not how it works. Actually, what these models do is because they've been listening to a lot of music, they are very good at doing something that sounds very similar to what already exists. Actually being original is very hard. And from one point of view, as it now gets easier to create more generic music, it will actually be more difficult than ever to be truly unique.

Gustav Söderström (00:24:39):
So I still think there would be tremendous skill in creating something truly unique. And my hope would be that what happened with the DAW and that technology jump was you got a whole new genre like EDM that you couldn't really produce it with an orchestra or live. And maybe we'll see completely new music styles with these technologies. I think that would be very exciting. So that's on the positive side, but then you have the rights issue, which I have a lot of empathy for. And Spotify specifically has seen this before. So we had a different technology shift like this, which was the technology shift to online downloads of music and piracy and peer to peer. So first, it was a big technology shift in peer to peer and it was exciting for consumers. More consumers started listening to more music than ever. And I think that's where we are now with generative AI.

Gustav Söderström (00:25:31):
There's a new technology, but it also required a new business model before creators and industry could actually participate and benefit from this. And that's, obviously, self-serving to say because we were a big part of innovating that business model. But I still think that's what's necessary and I hope that that's what I and we could be part of. So I think we've seen the first part, the technology shift, and there will probably be a lot of discussion and chaos here which have a lot of empathy for, but I think we haven't seen the second part yet. What is a model where this could be a benefit? What actually happened after piracy is that the music industry got bigger than ever, not just as big but bigger than ever. And I think that could happen with this technology as well. But we're right in the beginning.

Lenny (00:26:20):
So along the same lines, something else you teach is this idea of all truly great products have to pull some magic trick. This comes up in your podcast a lot and I think you mentioned this other places, and thinking about all the stuff you're talking about here, it feels like, in a sense, everything's going to feel like magic because AI's baked into it.

Gustav Söderström (00:26:38):
I think when we did the AI DJ, we did a small version of that. When people first listened to it, we could see that reaction in use of testing when they've wondered ... So the magic trick there was that how could they record this person saying so many different things because it's talking about my music. So the magic trick was, obviously, didn't record a person saying, it's generated, and that magic trick wears off. You hear it all the time now and so forth, but it was one of those magic tricks. So I still think that concept is important and it seems to correlate with products going viral and taking off.

Gustav Söderström (00:27:15):
And I think it was the same using something like Dall-E or Stable Diffusion or Mid Journey the first time. It completely seemed like a magic trick. And, obviously, there is no magic, it's just data and statistics. But I think getting to that point and iterating a product to the point where it feels like magic the first time is very helpful. And it's often a question of just getting the performance to a certain level, scoping down, removing things. There's a lot of fine-tuning, I think, that makes you cross that line from it's cool and impressive but not magic to it feels like magic. I don't understand how this could be done.

Lenny (00:28:00):
Yeah, it reminds me of the launch of GBT which ended up being the biggest, most fastest growing product in history, and it's like the epitome of a magic trick. It feels like actual magic.

Gustav Söderström (00:28:09):
Absolutely, absolutely. And to most people, it is still very ... Actually to a lot of ascent, even to researchers, it's a little bit magical. No one really understands fully. So I guess there's maybe some magic left in the world.

Lenny (00:28:23):
Absolutely. And I think a lot of people are worried about not understanding what's going on there. Shifting to the way you all build product at Spotify. So Spotify is famous for popularizing this idea of squads and tribes. And correct me if I'm wrong, but you guys have moved away from that approach.

Gustav Söderström (00:28:39):
Yeah, that's right.

Lenny (00:28:41):
Okay. So I'd love to understand just why you shifted and what you learned from that approach to building product, and then just like how do you organize the teams now? What do you do now?

Gustav Söderström (00:28:51):
This was something that we focused a lot on early and it turned out to be smart of us to name these things into squads and chapters and so forth. It wasn't really ... Well, maybe it was deliberately branding, but it wasn't for purposes of branding that we made it up. We made it up because we thought it was a good structure to use and we needed names for things and this was the early internet eras you were allowed to make things up. And so it was very good for where we were at the time and it certainly helped us in recruiting. It's become a little bit of a cost to us because people still think that we organize that way and it's not a very efficient way of being organized at this scale or maybe even if you started over right now because we've learned more.

Gustav Söderström (00:29:35):
But I think the big difference is the idea with the squad specifically was twofold. They were supposed to be small and full stack. So squad should be about seven people and it should have front and backend, mobile, QA, agile coaches and so forth, and it should be very autonomous was the idea. And that's really what we shifted. So, first of all, as you grow the company, scaling in increments of seven engineers just creates a ton of overhead. So, obviously, our teams now tend to be much bigger, maybe two, three times that at least per manager to maybe have 14 or something instead of seven and just less overhead roles. So that's one. It looks more traditional as you learn more and is reasonable as you scale. The second big thing I think we struggle with was back then when I joined, the average age at Spotify was ... I mean, I was the oldest and this was 14 years ago. So I think the average age was probably under 30 or something and it wasn't most tech companies.

Gustav Söderström (00:30:46):
And so we had coming from Sweden, which is a different culture than the US, and I love a lot of things about Swedish culture and I think we managed to keep the best parts, but Sweden is a very bottoms-up autonomous culture. There's this famous drawing on how you make decisions in Sweden. In the US, I think it's just a hierarchy. In Sweden, it's a circle. It's in a circle, no one is in the middle, there is no leader and so forth.

Lenny (00:31:13):
Interesting.

Gustav Söderström (00:31:14):
So I think by culture, we're very inspired by this super autonomous thing. And I think the idea with autonomy is very reasonable and the right one, which is we work and we are hiring the smartest people we can find and we pay high salaries for that. So if you're hiring smart people, one way to think about it is you're renting brain power.

Gustav Söderström (00:31:39):
So if you're renting all of this expensive brain power and then you give them no room to think for themselves, that doesn't sound smart, then you should actually hire less smart people and keep your costs down or something. So I think you have to give a bunch of autonomy to actually maximize the value of the investment you're making. So that's very reasonable that you would give a lot of space for people to use as much of their talent and capacity as possible. But the problem with that is if you put autonomy very far towards the leaves of the organization, and also if you combine that with having a very junior organization, which we did back then, there's a fair chance that you're just going to produce heat. You're going to have a hundred squads with a hundred strategies running in a hundred directions. And Spotify has been there in that camp.

Gustav Söderström (00:32:29):
I mean, we managed to get somewhere, for sure, in spite of this, but I'd struggle to say we were efficient in doing that. So we've done a few things. The team structure is more traditional, larger teams, less overhead. And we've been specifically working with where in the org do we put the autonomy because the extremes are at the leaves and we were there. The other extreme may be at the top, let's say maybe some Twitter, there's one person. Both have problems. If you have it at the leaves, you're going to produce a lot of heat. If you have it at the top, you need someone with a lot of capacity and Elon has a lot of capacity, but you are, by definition, going to bottleneck. All decisions have to go through there. And Daniel, it's not his personality that he even wants to make all the decisions.

Gustav Söderström (00:33:19):
He wants to maximize throughput rather than to bottleneck the throughput. So the question is, if it's not at the top and not at the very bottom, where do you put it? And what we've found, which I don't think is very contrarian at all, I think this is the case in most companies, is around the VP level. So if you have Daniel, then you have the C level, myself and others, then you have the VP level, that is a good mix of instead of having one person in the company think, so only Daniel then and the rest just do, you have on the VP level in the company this many tens to maybe hundreds of people that have a lot of autonomy to think. So you get a good amount of freedom of thought and people thinking in different directions, but it's not like 8,000 people. And these people on the VP level are both quite a lot of them, but they're also usually quite senior. They have a lot of pattern recognition.

Gustav Söderström (00:34:16):
So I think that solves for, it's a good ... If you think of it as an optimization problem, it's a good optimization space. So the autonomy level in Spotify now tends to be quite high at the VP level and then lower around those levels.

Lenny (00:34:33):
And when you say autonomy, what does that actually mean? Is it the VP of, say, the podcasting product has a lot of say over what happens and there's not a ton of ... I don't know how involved are people above? And I know Maya's the VP of product, I believe, for the podcast product.

Gustav Söderström (00:34:48):
Exactly.

Lenny (00:34:49):
Who I think is going to come on the podcast someday. What does that mean in terms of Tommy for her, what practically?

Gustav Söderström (00:34:54):
So it means that I would ask Maya to define a strategy for what we do in podcasting, how are we going to be different, why would a podcaster want to be here? Whereas another company, I will make that strategy or another company, Daniel would make that strategy. Same with ... The AI DJ, for example, came from our personalization team. And so that was a bet that they made. So they have autonomy to make those kinds of bets and define strategies. Same with the user interface, we have an experienced team, can talk about the org structure later, but I put a lot of autonomy on the VP of experience to define and suggest what it is that we want to do. And in other companies, I would define all of that myself, for example.

Lenny (00:35:45):
Just going even a little bit further here, I know you have just strong opinions on the way to organize teams and how the organization helps you optimize for specific things. What are your just thoughts along those lines and what have you learned about how the impact of organization and what you're optimizing for?

Gustav Söderström (00:36:03):
Yeah. So I talk about an idealized spectrum or maybe not idealized but exaggerated spectrum. Nothing is really true, but you create extremes to make a point. So on one spectrum, you have something like Amazon, which is known for two-pizza teams, no dependencies. You try to minimize dependencies so you can run in parallel. Teams compete with each other even on the same project and so forth. But they have direct access to the user.

Gustav Söderström (00:36:37):
And so the benefit here is if you have an idea, the time to get the user is very low and it has worked for them. It's produced Kindle, it produced Alexa, it's produced a lot of very novel things. There are a few interesting downsides here. One downside that I'm extremely impressed with Jeff Bezos' foreseeing is if you have teams that compete with each other, the incentives are to hide your results, hide your code. And that should make for an organization that gets no platform leverage because no one's corporating. And I think either he had that insight or because he saw this, he had to do this, but he's well known for pushing extremely hard on hard APIs. If you don't create hard APIs to your technology, you're out. And if you think about it, it has to be that way because otherwise no one would do it.

Lenny (00:37:32):
And a hard API is essentially everyone knows how to use this API and connect to this team to interface with.

Gustav Söderström (00:37:38):
Exactly. You have to expose your technology to others. You have to maintain those APIs and they have to be very structured because otherwise the whole thing would collapse as everyone's supposed to compete because there are no incentives. You have to centrally force that. And interestingly, even though theoretically then they're the worst position to have a structured platform, I think, because they forced it so hard, they were the ones who did Amazon Web Services because they had such hard defined APIs because of this rule that it was easier for them to turn it inside out and expose it the rest of the world. Whereas if you look at someone like Google, I think they struggled more with externalizing their APIs maybe because it is so friendly and soft. So they didn't need as hard APIs on the inside because there was no competition. People could just go into each other's code.

Gustav Söderström (00:38:18):
So it's interesting anecdote around it, but the main point is you're faster there, but it's going to be hard to corporate. And so you will see something like maybe exaggerating a bit. Sometimes you'll see multiple search boxes on the same page from different teams. And this has been true in Spotify, by the way, as well. You've seen multiple toasters on the Now Playing view coming up from different teams because they're working. When we were in the autonomous mode, everyone running. And then ... So you get the benefit of speed, but you get the drawback of shipping your org chart and shipping complexity to the end user. But clearly, that's been the right choice for Amazon because they're a trillion-dollar company. But then on the other spectrum, you have something like Apple who's also a trillion-dollar company. So clearly, both models work, where you would never see two search boxes from the same team popping up on an iPhone. That is centrally organized by something that is close to single individual.

Gustav Söderström (00:39:20):
So they are instead in what is probably the world's biggest largest functional org, they're doing as much. If you think about what goes into the Apple, I mean, they certainly do everything we do. They have music service, podcast service, audiobooks, and they have a billion other services. So it's not like they have an easier problem. And yet they build something that feels more like it was built by a single developer for a single user. So they centralize and they have this bottlenecking function that everything has to go through and be decided how it fits with everything else. And so that has the benefit of the user experience being simpler and not shipping the org chart and increasing complexity. But it also has the drawback of speed without having facts on it. I've heard people working at Apple have said, "Yeah, it took seven years to get that thing to market," because you just had to wait in the pipeline.

Gustav Söderström (00:40:17):
So you have these extremes. And I think the most interesting example, I think, to think about is when you double click the power button on an iPhone, the Apple Pay comes up. That decision, how did that happen? You can imagine that all the services team would like to pop up when you double click that button. And so someone had to decide, should music come up, should payments come up, should something else come up? And so they have a different structure there. And on that spectrum of centralized versus decentralized, because of our strategy, which is we're a single application, trying to add or not trying to, we have added multiple types of content with actually very different business models on the backend, rev shares and royalties and book deals and so forth into single user experience. That is our strategy. We think the user experience in keeping that simple is the most important thing.

Gustav Söderström (00:41:12):
So we've chosen more of the centralized model, where these different vertical businesses, if you think about it, the music business, podcast, audiobooks business, they have it to go through a single recommendation organization because that's another problem. Which one do you recommend to which user? Should be a book or podcast or music? And how do you weigh them against each other? And also the user interface could easily get incredibly complicated if everyone built their own UI. The music team built their UI and then someone added features on top. So that's how we chose to optimize. But it is based on our strategy and I think both models work.

Lenny (00:41:50):
This episode is brought to you by Eco. Last month, Eco users earned an average of $84 in cashback rewards. How? With Eco, the future of personal finance. Eco is the update to a misaligned financial system. Providing an app that works just like your bank but removes almost all of the middleman, helping even the best money optimizers optimize in less time automatically. What if you earn rewards for paying your rent or got rewarded for ordering food and shopping online or even earn rewards for saving each month? And then imagine if you got rewarded again just for getting rewarded. With Eco, you can spend at some of your favorite merchants and automatically get 5% cashback, plus Eco's APY rewards look more like $80, not 80 cents. And then there are Eco points, the world's first open reward system. You earn them whenever you do almost anything in the Eco app.

Lenny (00:42:40):
Eco is working to make these points the most rewarding points ever. So it pays to be early. Sound too good to be true? Go to eco.com/lenny, sign up for an onboarding and find out why it isn't. Lenny's Podcast listeners who attend an Eco welcome session will get an exclusive 4% APY on deposits over $1,000. Learn more at eco.com/lenny, that's E-C-O.com/lenny.

Lenny (00:43:05):
It's interesting these two examples you gave, Apple and Amazon, they're two of the biggest companies in the world and they're like at the extremes of these two into the spectrum. And it's interesting, most companies are somewhere in the middle. I wonder if there's just a benefit to being in an extreme and that ends up being really important.

Gustav Söderström (00:43:21):
I think so. In almost all industries, you have this smiling curve concept, where you want to be at the extremes on the smiling curve, and that's where big business opportunities are but not in the middle. So it's probably true in terms of organizational models as well.

Lenny (00:43:34):
Speaking of extremes, I want to talk a bit about taking big bets. So you guys had this big launch event recently where you basically redesigned the whole primary feed of Spotify to make it feel more like where apps are going, like TikTok reels feel of just stream, and you start hearing videos and music starts playing and some people loved it, some people did not. And I'm curious as a product leader, how you think about thinking long term and dealing with people that are just like, "What the hell's ... I hate change, stop changing things." How do you think about that? Who do you listen to? Who do you ignore? How do you know to stay the course? How do you approach that?

Gustav Söderström (00:44:10):
Yeah, you're being very kind. There was a lot of negative feedback on Twitter on some of that. So let me actually dig into some detail because I think for product people listening to this, this is an interesting lesson that I think few companies talk about because you want talk about everything that went exactly as you thought they would and you don't want to talk about the things that didn't go exactly as you thought they would.

Gustav Söderström (00:44:39):
So I'll go through what we are trying to achieve and what we learned. So Spotify is mainly a background application, and for a long time, we've been considered very good at background music and podcast recommendation. When the phone is in your pocket and you're listening to an EDM playlist or pop playlist or something, we're really good at inserting another EDM track there or another pop track there or something like that in the background.

Gustav Söderström (00:45:09):
What we hear from users again and again, though, is that they say that they get trapped in a taste bubble. So I love my Spotify, I love this, but I'm a little bit bored with EDM now and Spotify's not suggesting something completely new. And if you think about that problem, it may sound similar to the recommendation problem, it's just another recommendation problem, but it's actually fundamentally different because when you're recommending another EDM track inside the EDM playlist, you have a lot of signal from that user that they like EDM. But if you're going to recommend a completely new genre, by definition, you have no idea. Because if you had an idea, it wasn't new to them. So you can't know anything. So back to hit rate, your hit rate is going to be incredibly low when you suggest something completely new to the user.

Gustav Söderström (00:46:03):
So this problem of helping people get out of the taste bubble isn't that easy as it sounds. And we can't really take some genre that maybe isn't typical. So I'm a big fan of Reggaeton, for example. It's not typically ... It's not that common in Sweden. And if you would look the rest of my profile, it's EDM heaviness, you probably wouldn't have guessed it. And Spotify wouldn't have guessed it. So if I'm listening to my favorite EDM playlist in the background or maybe my metal playlist, metal is very big in Sweden, it's really hard for us to just insert a Reggaeton track in the middle of that. Most people are going to think Spotify's broken.

Lenny (00:46:41):
Yeah.

Gustav Söderström (00:46:41):
What the hell are they thinking? So that doesn't really work. So in order to help people break out of their taste bubbles, you need something different. You need something where your hit ratio can be very low and you need people to expect it to be very low.

Gustav Söderström (00:47:00):
So when we recommend things in the background, our hit ratio needs to be at least nine out of 10, maybe one dud is okay, but if you get five duds, you're going to think we broke your playlist and your session. We need something where one out of 10 is a success. If you find one gem out of 10 tries, you're very happy. So you need a completely different paradigm. And you also need to be able to go through many candidates quickly because the hit rate is so low. You can't take three minutes per item. It's like, "Okay, I didn't like this," and it's still like two minutes left before the next one comes on. You need to quickly say, "No, no, no." So the obvious candidates for this are these feed-type experience, where you can go through lots of content, you're expecting the hit ratio to be much lower. And if you don't like it, the cost is very low, you just swipe.

Gustav Söderström (00:47:50):
And then this is the reason why people have been ... When they want to break out of their taste bubbles or when they come into Spotify and listen to something completely new, it is usually because they found it on one of these services, like a TikTok or YouTube or something, where they get exposed to lots of new content. So people were asking us for these tools and so that's what we wanted to solve for. And so we built a bunch of features, feed-like structures, where you can go through either a new genre with many tracks or a podcast channel with genre with many episodes or even full playlists. And we implemented those and we put them in something called subfeeds. So in the current experience, and this is roll out worldwide, if you click the podcast subfeed, you get a feed of podcast episodes. Click the music subfeeds, you get a feed of playlists where you can go through many playlists. And if you don't understand the name, you can quickly hear what they sound like and check out a few tracks and understand if this is for you. And if you go through the search and browse page, you can find completely new genres that you can quickly go through.

Gustav Söderström (00:48:59):
And so those are working as we intended. People go to them when they want to find new music. They browse through them and they save new songs. So they're working as we intended. The thing that didn't work as we intended was when users asked us for this again and again, we took the sum of these things and we put it on Home because people ask so much about discovery and we can see clearly how correlated discoveries with retention on Spotify and so forth. But what we misjudged or failed or rather learned about our own homepage is that the way it works right now, and this is what you can see in the Twitter comment, if you remove the angry voices and try to see what they're saying, they're saying the following, which is actually quite clear in the quantitative data as well, that if you look at what people do on Spotify's homepage, the current one, it is almost 90% what we call recall.

Gustav Söderström (00:49:59):
So it is either getting to a session that you're already in or a specific playlist that you know you want to get to or at least a specific use case. So you come in with a high intent, you actually knew what you wanted, and maybe only 10% of the time as a true discovery, like I don't know what I want. So if you think about, that is 90% recall and 10% discovery. When we tested the design ... So the subfeeds were working and not working, but when we tested some of them on Home, we switched it from 90/10 to 10/90. So 10% recall, 90% discovery. And while people want discovery, they probably don't want 90% discovery, instead of 90% recall. So if you then look at the comments on Twitter, what they're saying is like, "Hey, I can't find my playlists anymore. Where are these things?"

Gustav Söderström (00:50:47):
They're not really complaining about the discovery, they're complaining about the things they don't get anymore. And we can see this in the quant data as well. And you can see traffic shifting from home into search and into library, which is a clear sign people are trying to find the things they can't find anymore. And you can even see people then trying to use these discovery tools which are optimized for quickly understanding new things to do the recall. Where's that workout playlist I know I want? And it's actually very bad UI for recall, it's like a slot machine, right? Very unpredictable if you ever get to that workout playlist. It was optimized for finding new things, not for recall of existing things. When you do recall, you want the dense UI with many items on screen because you know what it is you're looking for. So you don't need a lot of real estate when you're doing discovery of new things. You want a lot of pixels and you probably want sound because you don't know what it is.

Gustav Söderström (00:51:40):
So what we learn about our UI, and I think there's maybe a little bit of product jealousy here, you always look at other experiences. And if you look around, it could be forgiven for thinking that most other products, if you look at something like YouTube, for example, their homepage is exactly that. It's a huge single-item discovery feed with only new items. And people don't seem to tweet angrily about how angry they are at you to say they love YouTube and it's a big product. And I think what we discovered was that we actually did something really well on our homepage, which was supporting you being inside a multiple sessions at the same time. So you could be in the middle of two podcasts and an audiobook and also them actually I just want to get to that workout playlist. I don't remember the name of it, but I know it's workout.

Gustav Söderström (00:52:31):
We actually did that part really well. I would venture just say much better than the other experiences where you literally have to go to some tab and into library and start browsing to get back to where you were. And so maybe it's path dependent. Because we have done recall pretty well, people got, I think, reasonably upset when they couldn't do the recall anymore. And we didn't want lose that because it was one of the things we did well and underestimated. And my takeaway is actually we do it better than other experiences. So we certainly want to keep that. So what we did was now we're just updating their hypothesis to achieve the same goal, which is these things are working and when people want to discover, they use them and they seem to work, they can also get better.

Gustav Söderström (00:53:20):
You're on this hill-climbing journey from a machine learning point of view, but the question is, how do you make sure that whenever people feel that they are in that I'm trapped in my taste bubble, they understand that these things are there and they're easy to use? So now we have a version of Home that we are also testing, obviously, where these things are very available but voluntary and you can still do all of the recall. And so from my point of view, this is the reason we A/B test because you want to be scientific about it and you want to learn as much as possible about your own product and your users. And now I'm sharing a lot of the learnings. Maybe we should keep them to ourselves, but my hunch is that it's going to make it a much better product.

Gustav Söderström (00:54:09):
But what I told my teams when we went into this, because I've done this a few times, agree to signing, I think there are two fundamentally different types of product development. One is designing a new feature. It is hard, but it's voluntary for people to use. So you do the AI DJ. Some people love it, that's fine. If you don't like it, it didn't make it worse for you. But when you redesign, it is much more tricky because it's not voluntary to participate in the redesign. So there's a cost even for people who don't like it. Then you have a very tricky problem here, which is there are going to be two types of feedback. One is you did something and it was right, but people are upset because you changed stuff. The other is you did something and it wasn't right, and people are also upset but for good reasons.

Gustav Söderström (00:55:08):
And so how do you separate these two? Because I think I explained this to ... When we talk through this with my teams, I think the analogy to think about is you have your desktop, your physical desktop, you have your computer in one place, you have your pencil over here, you have your notebook over there, and I come in and I just rearrange all of it. And you have spent, in our case, maybe 12 years with that setup. It doesn't matter if I have a lot of quantitative data that my new setup is better, you're going to get upset because you are effective in this old setup. And it's hard to tell those apart. The most classic use case is the Facebook newsfeed, which people are very upset about when it became a single newsfeed. But it turned out to solve a lot of user problems that you didn't have to run around all of Facebook collecting events yourself.

Gustav Söderström (00:55:58):
So there are some ways of understanding if you made it better, but people's habits are broken or if it's not better. And one thing is, for example, to look at new user cohorts that don't have that behavior versus all user cohorts and so forth. So we went through all of this with the teams. Before we did it, I said, "This is going to be painful." There's probably going to be a lot of tweets because chances that we get it exactly right are very low. So for that reason, it hasn't been very hard on the team. It is hard ... You want to respond to people, but the right way to do it is to listen, understand, try new hypothesis to really figure out what's going on. So I think I've done it maybe three or four times now. Three maybe. One unsuccessful, two successfully. So kind of knew what I was getting into.

Gustav Söderström (00:56:45):
So it's almost like you punish yourself, very painful, but also the most exciting things. And I think any product person knows that the easiest, the most straightforward thing to do is to iterate around where you are. There's no risk. You're not going to get fired, no user is going to get angry. But everyone also knows that eventually if you don't adapt new technologies, new paradigms, et cetera, you're going to get replaced. You have to find this balance of trying new things. And when you work in software, you have this tool of A/B testing and being scientific about it. When you build hardware, it's worse. If you're wrong, you're wrong. You can't update.

Lenny (00:57:26):
I love this story. I so appreciate you sharing it. I imagine also with a big launch like this, you can't actually A/B test it ahead of time because of the press season. They're like, "Oh my God, look what Spotify's doing." And so you're limited there. Imagine, right? You couldn't really test this ahead of time.

Gustav Söderström (00:57:40):
The hardest thing about this is if you're trying something completely new, the MVP needs to be very big so you can build a new IU, but if you didn't do algorithms for single item feed, you can't tell if it was the right idea but poor machine learning, right? UI poor machine learning. Or you have to build a lot and that gets quite expensive. That's actually ... The biggest why it's painful is not really the feedback from the outside. It is the cost you have to take on the inside. You incur a lot of costs as you're really hoping you're right.

Gustav Söderström (00:58:15):
And in our cases, the changes on the homepage aren't that hard for us to do. The important thing is that the underlying hypothesis of, can we help you break out of your taste bubble actually works and then you update the acquisition funnels into that experience. But I think the problem is that you need to get so many things in place to be able to say, "You might get a false negative," just because you didn't do it well or not. That's the biggest challenge, I think, with these big rewrites where everyone has to update everything before you can know if you're right or wrong.

Lenny (00:58:52):
What was that process like of helping you understand what is not working and what is working and what you wanted to change? I imagine there's a bunch of data you're looking at, some tweets, things like that. What was the tactical, "Oh, shoot, something's not going the way we expected, here's what we should do?"

Gustav Söderström (00:59:08):
Well, the feeds, we tested, but the home feed, we rolled out and tested afterwards. And we tested out on users, a few different variants of it. And then we got the data back and we looked more at the quantitative data. And we do a lot of user research where people sit and use the feeds to understand and build our own theorem mind of what is working and what is not working. And then, obviously, you look at user feedback, of course, and some users are very good at expressing what is of it that isn't working, others are not as good as expressing what isn't working. So it can be hard to parse that, but certainly, that's a factor as well.

Gustav Söderström (00:59:49):
And so then once you do that, then you have quantitative data to look at. And then you sit in recent through, what do you think is right and wrong? What are the different hypotheses? What is working, what is not working? And then just update and test again and again until you prove or disprove your hypothesis. Trying to be as scientific as possible about it. And also I think the biggest risk also when you've invested so much time in something is getting precious about things. You have to just be brutal. You have to believe in things 100% until the data says no and then you believe in something else 100%. That sounds easy. It's very hard to do, to the extent that people get upset when you do it because, for some reason, people don't like when people change their minds. It is what we should want from everyone. I would love a politician who said, "I'd looked at the data and I realized actually this is right and now I believe this." But we hate politicians that do that. They feel untrustworthy and we ridicule them.

Gustav Söderström (01:00:56):
So I think that's the biggest risk with anyone. You just have to be unemotional and just look at the proof and the data. And then if you do that, you just move on and then you get to where you want to be, and you solve the same problem but you adapt.

Lenny (01:01:14):
I really like that philosophy. Essentially, it's the idea of strong opinions loosely held. Is that-

Gustav Söderström (01:01:19):
Exactly. Exactly what it is. And it sounds so easy, but it's hard.

Lenny (01:01:23):
Right? Because to your point, people don't respect someone changing their mind. They're like, "Oh, I see, they were wrong the whole time and they were so confident about being wrong."

Gustav Söderström (01:01:31):
Yeah, exactly. And it's unclear why it is what we should want, but I think it has something to do with human psychology. We actually tend to love profits and people who hold very strong opinions with very little data. Those are the people we like. People will look at a lot of data and actually that, we don't like. Not sure why.

Lenny (01:01:57):
We're flawed creatures.

Gustav Söderström (01:01:59):
For sure.

Lenny (01:02:00):
Is there something that you've recently changed your mind about along these same lines that maybe comes to mind of like, "Oh, yeah?"

Gustav Söderström (01:02:06):
No, I think these learnings about the science system and homepage does really well, maybe better than others, that we don't want to wash out with a bath water or whatever the [inaudible 01:02:20] expression is. I think that's the biggest current learning I'm actually very happy about.

Lenny (01:02:26):
Yeah, I love learning that we're doing some really well that we didn't really realize necessarily and maybe we should lead into that more.

Gustav Söderström (01:02:34):
Exactly.

Lenny (01:02:35):
Going in a somewhat different direction. Shishir Mehrotra suggested to ask you something. He's on your board, I believe.

Gustav Söderström (01:02:41):
Yes.

Lenny (01:02:41):
And he suggested to ask you about your 10% planning time. What is that about?

Gustav Söderström (01:02:46):
This is a concept that I think Shishir has used for a long time ever since he worked at YouTube. And the idea is that, roughly, you shouldn't be spending more than 10% of your time planning versus executing or building, which means that if you're working quarterly 10 weeks, you should spend one week planning as we work in six-month increment. So we try to spend two weeks planning and roughly successful. And this is ... Actually, when we talk about org models, give a shout-out to Brian Chesky at Airbnb, who is actually one of the first, I think, to have these more contrarian old models. He's much more applesque than most of Silicon Valley. He also works in six-month increments. He has a lot of experience in that as well. So that's what the 10% planning time is. And I think if you find yourself planning much more than that, you're either planning too much or your execution period is just too short for that amount of planning. It's a rule of thumb, but I find that it works.

Lenny (01:03:53):
I asked a few PMs what I should ask you, PMs that work at Spotify actually, that I haven't told you. And someone pointed out that you always bring a lot of energy and clarity to a room. That's something they see you as really strong at. What have you learned about just the importance of that or just how to do that well as a leader?

Gustav Söderström (01:04:11):
Well, that's great to hear. I didn't know that so I'm trying to figure out what to answer. I think that the energy, I don't know. I guess I'm just excited about what I do. I've always been excited about technology. I love seeing new things. My core drive is still this notion of you see something which I think you'll empathize with that doesn't exist yet. And you're like, "Wow, I wonder if that could exist. That would be so cool." And then in order to get people to do it, you try to share that excitement. So I don't think I can bring a lot of energy for something I'm not excited about. So I have to work on things I actually believe in and that I'm excited about. And so maybe then the energy comes more naturally. Unfortunately, for me, so far, Spotify has been in this phase where a lot of innovation is allowed and I'm even asked to try to do new cool things.

Gustav Söderström (01:05:09):
Maybe I would have less energy for a pure optimization phase. On the clarity, I've always liked trying to explain things. It's a well-known fact that the best way to understand something is to try to explain to someone else. So I go around explaining things to people who didn't ask for it and not to sound smart, but to see if I actually understood it. And so maybe it's that practice. And on that note, I actually do ask my leaders that work for me and I ask them to ask their leaders to always explain themselves. And I think when ... We talked a little bit about autonomy and so forth, we don't promise everyone that they have to agree, but I think the promise we should make to all employees is that even if they don't agree, they should be entitled to understand why you're making the decision.

Gustav Söderström (01:06:06):
What I don't think is acceptable is to say, "No, we're going to do it this way because I'm more senior. I've seen this a bunch of times. You are not smart enough." All of those things. I think you have to explain yourself so you owe an explanation. And I find that valuable back to the only way to understand something is to explain it because it usually turns out that if you can't explain it yourself, you probably don't really even understand it yourself. Sometimes I think it's possible that you can have product instincts that are good but you can't express them. But most of them, when people say there's something there but they can't explain it, they actually don't understand it themselves. And many times, there actually isn't anything there. And also if you can explain it as a product person, that knowledge is now shared. So it just becomes much more effective for the organization. So sometimes I try to provoke people a little bit and say ... When people ask how much is art versus science, I say, "It's 0% art, 0% magic, and 100% science." And that's because I want to force people to try to explain it. I think we use the word art and magic. We have historically used the word art and magic for anything that we couldn't yet explain.

Gustav Söderström (01:07:33):
Genetics was magic and art until it was science. And quantum physics was magic until it was science. And most recently, actually, intelligence and creativity was art and magic until it was statistics in an LLM. So I think I try to push people to say, "Are you sure you can explain this?" because that forces people to think through. So maybe I like it and I try to force it on people. So maybe that's why people think I sometimes bring clarity.

Lenny (01:08:07):
I love that. Question along those lines, is there a system or an approach to explaining that you recommend? Is it just write it out in a document? Is it explaining in a certain style or is it just however is natural to the person?

Gustav Söderström (01:08:20):
I used to write everything and then write and rewrite and make it more and more condensed. So that worked for me. I don't write as much anymore. Now, I tend to walk and talk in my head myself. What I actually do is I ... And I found this different for different people and a lot of people want to bounce something with someone else, that's how they think. You repeat the same thing again and again and you get some feedback on it. And so I used to write a lot. I sometimes do when it's an idea I want to understand better. And at some point in my life, I would love to write something real like a book or something. But what I do increasingly now is I do my one-on-ones with peers or people who report to me or something, and I just put on AirPods and do a distributed walk and talk.

Gustav Söderström (01:09:12):
Both people are walking but in different locations and you spend an hour discussing something. That has actually turned out to be very, very fruitful. So then you get the power of you're not alone so you get more brain power than your own. And I don't think there is strong evolutionary proof for this, but there's certainly indications that you're thinking better when you're walking, whether it's because you're oxygenating your brain or because it's evolutionary for some other reason, I'm not sure. But I found that walking, talking, and thinking actually even if you're not in person, just over AirPods, it's super effective. It was the pandemic that forced us. I thought we would get less creative and strategizing will suffer during the pandemic and I found the opposite. We had more of this than ever and I started thinking about why, and I think it's all of these walk and talks that we did.

Lenny (01:10:07):
You threw out there that you want to write a book someday. What do you think your book would be about?

Gustav Söderström (01:10:11):
I have no idea. I have no idea. Statistically, it's probably going to be about something that I did a lot, so it has to be about something with technology or product or something. But I would love to write something fictional. That'd be a lot of fun.

Lenny (01:10:26):
Oh, boy. I'll pre-order as soon as that's up. Another concept I wanted to touch on that another PM suggested, which is he called it the P in the pants analogy. Does that ring a bell? And is that interesting to talk about?

Gustav Söderström (01:10:40):
I don't know exactly which occasion this person is referring to, but I know I've used that analogy a few times.

Lenny (01:10:49):
Okay. Promising.

Gustav Söderström (01:10:50):
I don't know if it's like a Swedish analogy because I thought it was more widely known. But the idea is that you do something ... So the saying is that's like peeing in your pants in cold weather. It feels really warm and nice to begin with. And then after a while, you start to regret it. It's about being short term, basically. So now I just say that's like peeing in the pants inside because people know what I mean. It's a short-term thing.

Lenny (01:11:21):
That's a hilarious way of communicating that idea. Must be a Swedish thing.

Gustav Söderström (01:11:25):
Yes, I think Swedish people do it for some reason, apparently others don't.

Lenny (01:11:30):
Maybe because it's cold a lot of times of the year.

Gustav Söderström (01:11:33):
Yes. That's probably it. This is a saying in cold climate. In the warm, it doesn't help. No one understands what you mean.

Lenny (01:11:39):
Speaking of Sweden, do you watch Succession?

Gustav Söderström (01:11:42):
Yes, I do.

Lenny (01:11:43):
Okay. So Sweden's become a big part of the show, specifically the company trying to ... I guess I don't want to spoil, but there's a character that's really important. Yes, exactly. That is Swedish. And so I'm curious just what do you think of the way they portray the Swedish culture and Swedish business dealings?

Gustav Söderström (01:11:59):
It's super fun to see this as a Sweden. And I guess, first and foremost, like anyone or any person or any country that gets represented by super tall, well-built, great looking Alexander Skarsgård should probably be pretty happy. So that's good. Then I think there's this episode where they are in Norway, without giving away too much.

Lenny (01:12:25):
Yep.

Gustav Söderström (01:12:26):
There are elements that are authentic. There's a lot of, I think, paid brand positioning from a Swedish brand named Fjällräven, which I think means arctic fox, which is actually a very popular outdoor brand in Sweden. So that's authentic. The sauna things and so forth are authentic. So it's real, but it's exaggerated. Actually, the thing that isn't very authentic is his negotiation style. Swedish people tend to be serious, cautious, and this guy's more of a player. So he's not the typical Swedish businessman from a negotiation tactic point of view, I think.

Lenny (01:13:11):
Yeah, it doesn't make me think of the way you described it where in Sweden, people sit in a circle and no one's in the center.

Gustav Söderström (01:13:15):
No, exactly. He's very much in the center.

Lenny (01:13:19):
And then when people go saunas, there are just like a chant, sauna, sauna [inaudible 01:13:23].

Gustav Söderström (01:13:23):
Exactly.

Lenny (01:13:24):
The last episode.

Gustav Söderström (01:13:25):
It's a great show. I love it.

Lenny (01:13:26):
I love it. This season is insane. I'm so curious where it all goes. Maybe just the last question before very exciting lightning round. Spotify is, at this point, the biggest podcasting platform for me specifically and I think globally, and I love using it. It works great. I'm curious just what's next for Spotify and specifically Spotify podcasting.

Gustav Söderström (01:13:48):
There are two sides to it. It's for Spotify creators and for Spotify listeners. For Spotify creators, there are two things. One is, and this is what we talked about at Stream On, we talked about it also for music discovery, but it's the same problem and even harder for podcast. So we're still focused very heavily on helping podcast creators find more audience. This is ... Like I said, it's even a bigger problem to break out of your habits and your bubbles in podcasting. Such a big investment to find a new podcast. And so that is something, I think, we could and should do really well. So we keep investing a lot there. And as I said, you'll see more as we roll up more features now.

Gustav Söderström (01:14:37):
The other big need for creators is monetization and you can monetize today in many ways with DEI and Spotify SEI and so forth. But we're working hard to expand that and make it better because the industry is starting to mature and I think this is one of the biggest needs and the biggest things we could do for creators to help them monetize better, actually both free and paid. We also have paid podcast. So that's on the creator side.

Gustav Söderström (01:15:07):
On the consumer side, I don't want to share too much. We've shown that we're investing a lot in discovery. I want to keep some secrets for when they roll out, but we are investing a lot in the user expense itself. I think it's far from optimal yet what it could be. One thing that I can share that we're investing a lot in is just the ubiquity and playback across different devices and in cars and all these things that we've done well for music. But I think the listening experience can get a lot more seamless. I think search can get better. The data about podcasts and ... Well, I don't want to say too much, but looking at AI and generative technology, there is a lot that can be done.

Lenny (01:15:52):
All right. Well, I'll take what I can get. With that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you, Gustav. Are you ready?

Gustav Söderström (01:16:01):
I think I am. Let's do it.

Lenny (01:16:03):
Okay, we'll find out. What are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Gustav Söderström (01:16:08):
Okay. This is why I try to squeeze in seven into two and three. So if we start on product, I think it's well known, but one that I would recommend product people to read is 7 Powers by Hamilton Helmer, and Netflix has used a lot. We use a lot. It's just if you're starting out, it's great to have a strategy framework. No strategy framework is right, but having one is better than none.

Gustav Söderström (01:16:31):
Another in the space of mental models and frameworks, I think, is The Complete Investor by Charlie Munger. So, yes, it's about investment, but really it's a bunch of mental models that he uses. And I think the key takeaway is you have a problem, you should always apply three different models to it because what models do is they simplify and reduce dimensionality. The world has probably infinite dimensions and they reduces to maybe three or four. And the risk with that is you happen to get rid of a really important dimension, maybe pandemic diseases or something. But if you use three models that have different dimensions and was reduced in different ways, statistically, and it comes to the same conclusion, even the second model you apply vastly increases your chances that you're right. So that was a good book to read.

Gustav Söderström (01:17:24):
Then I think if we go outside of product, I'm very interested in just science and mathematics. So a few quick ones. The Mystery of the Aleph, an amazing book. Something Deeply Hidden by Sean Carroll on the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Helgoland by Carlo Rovelli on the relational interpretation of quantum mechanics. The Beginning of Infinity and The Fabric of Reality by David Deutch. The Case Against Reality by Donald Hoffman on the evolution versus truth and that evolution doesn't optimize for seeing the truth, just for fitness. Gödel's Proof, I think, is an amazing book on his incompleteness theorem, that in any axiomatic systems, there will be true statements that can never be proven, which is a weird thing to think about. And then maybe one of my favorites is The Demon in the Machine by Paul Davies that, I think, is lesser known on how information is really just entropy and this concept of information engines, that you can power something by just information and exhaust is also information. That was not a quick list.

Lenny (01:18:39):
No, I was just going to say you've set the record for the most number of books, but it also shows how you've become so insightful and wise just reading books like these. And so I think if people are looking to get to a place that you're at now, I think there's the lesson.

Gustav Söderström (01:18:55):
I'll keep the artist much shorter, I promise.

Lenny (01:18:57):
It's all good. We got time. Okay, next question. What's a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Gustav Söderström (01:19:03):
So we talked about Succession and it is a recent favorite. So I'll just frivolously take something that isn't recent but is an absolute favorite, which is Halt and Catch Fire, which I think is on FX. Amazing show. If you ever worked in technology, kind of starts out in the Silicon Prairie in the '80s and follows up to present day. Amazing show.

Lenny (01:19:24):
Halt and Catch Fire. Yeah, I watched some of it. I actually fell off of it, but it's a good reminder to go check it out.

Gustav Söderström (01:19:29):
Got to go back.

Lenny (01:19:30):
I'm going to go back. What's a favorite recent interview question you like to ask?

Gustav Söderström (01:19:34):
I don't ask it, but my favorite question is Lex Fridman's small ending question that is usually something like, so what's the meaning of it all? I like that. It's a tough question to get.

Lenny (01:19:46):
I'm so tempted to ask you, but-

Gustav Söderström (01:19:48):
No, don't.

Lenny (01:19:50):
Okay. Let's move on. That'll be another ... That'll be our second take at this.

Gustav Söderström (01:19:53):
Yes.

Lenny (01:19:55):
What are some favorite products you've recently discovered that you love?

Gustav Söderström (01:19:58):
The obvious one is ChatGPT GPT-4 and just playing around with that, trying to create bots for yourself that do different things for you and so forth. But I don't think that's probably true for everyone. The other really favorite is something you've written about and talked about, which is Duolingo, which I think is both very impressive from a product point of view, the execution and what they've done. It is also insanely used in my family. We have a family account and everyone is using it and competing every day. So I'm both impressed by the product and I also use the product quite a lot.

Lenny (01:20:35):
What languages are folks learning within your family?

Gustav Söderström (01:20:38):
In my family, it's Spanish right now.

Lenny (01:20:41):
How's it going?

Gustav Söderström (01:20:41):
Bien.

Lenny (01:20:44):
You get a gold star.

Gustav Söderström (01:20:47):
I only have a few thousand XP. I'm not that good yet.

Lenny (01:20:51):
No, I don't know if that's good. That sounds pretty good. Next question, what's something relatively minor you've changed in your product development process that's had a tremendous impact on your team's ability to execute?

Gustav Söderström (01:21:01):
I'm not sure I've done anything minor that had a tremendous impact. Usually, it takes something bigger to get a big impact. I think maybe one thing that I've tried to do back to clarity and so forth is this thing I mentioned about I'm trying to push a lot for what I call Socratic debate, where the idea is obviously that the best idea wins, not the most senior idea and so forth. And trying to push for this notion of having people explain themselves, not saying I think there's something there or have a feeling or something like that. And apparently, as you said, that has had some impact because people apparently say that about me. So that's probably the biggest thing.

Lenny (01:21:53):
Final question, what is one fun ritual of the Spotify product team, and is it saunas?

Gustav Söderström (01:21:59):
So Spotify is so big now that it's quite local actually, different parts of Spotify, different product rituals. I accidentally created one ritual many years ago, maybe 12 years ago, when we talked about which phase a product is in. And it was ... We needed some definition. So I think off the cuff, I said, "Well, it's four phases." It's think it, build it, ship it, tweak it." And then the think it phase, it should be cheap, not a lot of money spent. In the build it phase, you're going to start spending a lot of money. So then you must have reduced the risk in the think it phase that you're right. And then you have the ship it phase and then you go over and tweak it. And it was something that wasn't that thought through, but it's funny because I still hear it sometimes even from other companies like, "Oh, we're in the think it phase," or "We're in the tweak it phase." So it stuck. I don't know if it's very good, but it's stuck.

Lenny (01:22:57):
It is catchy. I think anything getting stuck in people's head is a success. Gustav, thank you so much for being here. We are two for two for Swedish people. Gustaf, with an F, Alströmer was on the podcast.

Gustav Söderström (01:23:10):
Who is also an amazing person.

Lenny (01:23:12):
Also an amazing person. I feel very jealous of people that get to work with you and for you. Thank you again for being here. Two final questions, where can folks find you online if they want to learn more, maybe reach out, ask some questions.

Gustav Söderström (01:23:23):
[inaudible 01:23:23] @GustavS.

Lenny (01:23:24):
Okay. Say it again

Gustav Söderström (01:23:28):
@GustavS.

Lenny (01:23:29):
Awesome. And then final question is just how can listeners be useful to you?

Gustav Söderström (01:23:33):
Just reach out. I do read feedback and I try to remove the angry comments and understand what they're actually thinking and why they're upset or what's not working.

Lenny (01:23:44):
And then the reaching out, would you recommend an angry tweet at you or more of a email to that email address you shared?

Gustav Söderström (01:23:50):
Well, the @GustavS is the Twitter handle, so just tweet at me.

Lenny (01:23:54):
Okay.

Gustav Söderström (01:23:56):
You can be nice as well.

Lenny (01:23:57):
Okay.

Gustav Söderström (01:23:57):
It's okay.

Lenny (01:23:58):
Amazing. Gustav, thank you so much for being here.

Gustav Söderström (01:24:01):
Thank you for having me, Lenny. It's been a pleasure.

Lenny (01:24:03):
Bye, everyone.

Lenny (01:24:05):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcast, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:00):
A lot of companies are trying to measure productivity for their teams.

Nicole Forsgren (00:00:03):
Most productivity metrics are a lie. If the goal is more lines of code, I can prompt something to write the longest piece of code ever. It's just too easy to gain that system.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:12):
How do I know if my eng team is moving fast enough, if they can move faster, if they're just not performing as well as they can?

Nicole Forsgren (00:00:18):
Most teams can move faster. But faster for what? We can ship trash faster every single day. We need strategy and really smart decisions to know what to ship.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:27):
One of the biggest issues we're going to probably have with AI is learning how much to trust code that it generates.

Nicole Forsgren (00:00:32):
We can't just put in a command and guess something back and accept it. We really need to evaluate it. Are we seeing hallucinations? What's the reliability? Does it meet the style that we would typically write?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:00:42):
So much of the time is now going to be spent reviewing code versus writing code.

Nicole Forsgren (00:00:45):
There's some real opportunity there to not just rethink workflows, but rethink how we structure our days and how we structure our work. Now, we can also make a 45-minute work block useful because getting into the flow is actually kind of handed off, at least, in part to the machine or the machine can help us get back into the flow by, reminding us of context and generating diagrams of the system.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:03):
What's just one thing that you think an eng team, a product team can do this week, next week to get more done?

Nicole Forsgren (00:01:09):
Honestly, I think the best thing you can do-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:01:12):
Today, my guest is Nicole Forsgren. With so much talk about how AI is increasing developer productivity, more and more people are asking, "How do we measure this productivity gain? And are these AI tools actually helping us or hurting how our developers work?" Nicole has been at the forefront of this space longer than anyone. She created the most used frameworks for measuring developer experience called DORA and SPACE. She wrote the most important book in the space called Accelerate and is about to publish her newest book called Frictionless, which gives you a guide to helping your team move faster and do more in this emerging AI world. Her core thesis is that AI indeed accelerates coding. But developers aren't speeding up as much as you think because they still have to deal with broken builds and unreliable tools and processes, and a bunch of new bottlenecks that are emerging.

(00:02:01):
In our conversation, we chat about her current, best and very specific advice for how to measure productivity gains from AI, signs that your team could be moving faster, what companies get wrong when trying to measure engineering productivity, how AI tools are both helping and hurting engineers, including getting into flow states, her seven-step process for setting up a developer experience team at your company, how to get buy-in and measure the impact of a team like this and a ton more. This episode is for anyone looking to improve the performance of their engineering teams. If you enjoy this podcast, don't forget to subscribe and follow it in your favorite podcasting app or YouTube. It helps tremendously. Also, to become an annual subscriber of my newsletter, you get a year free of 15 incredible products including Lovable, Replit, Bolt, n8n, Linear, Superhuman, Descript, Wispr Flow, Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic Patterns, Raycast, ChatPRD, and Mobbin. Head on over to lennysnewsletter.com and click product pass. With that, I bring Nicole Forsgren.

(00:03:01):
This episode is brought to you by Mercury. I've been banking with Mercury for years. And honestly, I can't imagine banking any other way at this point. I switched from Chase and, holy moly, what a difference. Sending wires, tracking spend, giving people on my team access to move money around is so freaking easy. Where most traditional banking websites and apps are clunky and hard to use, Mercury is meticulously designed to be an intuitive and simple experience. And Mercury brings all the ways that you use money into a single product, including credit cards, invoicing, bill pay, reimbursements for your teammates, and capital. Whether you're a funded tech startup looking for ways to pay contractors and earn yield on your idle cash or an agency that needs to invoice customers and keep them current, or an e-commerce brand that needs to stay on top of cash flow and access capital, Mercury can be tailored to help your business perform at its highest level.

(00:03:53):
See what over 200,000 entrepreneurs love about Mercury. Visit mercury.com to apply online in 10 minutes. Mercury is a FinTech, not a bank. Banking services are provided through Mercury's FDIC-insured partner banks. For more details, check out the show notes. Here's a puzzle for you. What do OpenAI, Cursor, Perplexity, Vercel, FLAN, and hundreds of other winning companies have in common? The answer is they're all powered by today's sponsor, WorkOS. If you're building software for enterprises, you've probably felt the pain of integrating single sign-on, skim, RBAC, audited logs, and other features required by big customers. WorkOS turns those deal blockers into drop-in APIs with a modern developer platform built specifically for B2B SaaS.

(00:04:38):
Whether you're a seed-stage startup trying to land your first enterprise customer or a unicorn expanding globally, WorkOS is the fastest path to becoming enterprise-ready and unlocking growth. They're essentially Stripe for enterprise features. Visit workos.com to get started or just hit up their Slack support where they have real engineers in there, who answer your questions super fast. WorkOS allows you to build like the best with delightful APIs, comprehensive docs, and a smooth developer experience. Go to workos.com to make your app enterprise-ready today.

(00:05:13):
Nicole, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Nicole Forsgren (00:05:16):
Thank you. It's so good to be here.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:05:19):
It's so good to have you back. I was just watching our first episode, which we did two and a half years ago. I was watching it, and I was both shocked and not shocked that we barely talked about AI. The episode was called How to Measure and Improve Developer Productivity, and we got to AI barely like an hour in and we're just like, "Hmm, I wonder what's going to happen with AI and productivity." Does that just blow your mind?

Nicole Forsgren (00:05:41):
Yeah. Because it was just hitting the scene, it was the topic of so much conversation, and at the same time, so many things don't change. So many things are still important, so many things are the same. Yeah. It's also a little wild that it's been two and a half. Where does time go? Time is a social construct?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:06:01):
Yeah. Most of our conversation was just questions like, "Well, how might this impact people? How will we change the way we build product?" It was barely a thing back then. Now, it's the only thing that I imagine people want to talk about when they talk about engineering productivity. That's where we're going to be spending a lot of our time focusing on today. The reason I'm excited about this conversation, it feels like there's been so much money poured into AI tools increasing productivity. The fastest growing companies in the world are these engineering AI tools. And now, more and more people are just asking this question of just, "What gains are we getting out of this? How much is this actually helping us be more productive? How do we become more productive?"

(00:06:39):
You've been at the center of this world for longer than anyone. You've invented so many of the frameworks that people rely on now. So I'm really excited to have you back to talk about this stuff. I want to start with just this term DevEx, it's something that comes up a lot in this whole space, and we're going to hear this term a bunch in this conversation. Can you just explain what is DevEx, this term DevEx?

Nicole Forsgren (00:07:00):
DevEx is developer experience. And when we think about developer experience, we're really talking about what it's like to build software, day to day, for a developer. So the friction that they face, the workflows that they have to go through, any support that they have. It's important because when DevEx is poor, everything else just isn't going to help. The best processes, the best tools, the best... whatever magic you have, if the DevEx is bad, everything kind of takes-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:07:34):
Within DevEx is productivity, and I think the key insight that you had and other folks in the space of that is not just productivity, but there's also engineering happiness. We're going to get into a lot of these parts, but just maybe speak to... there's productivity and there's broader components to engineers being successful at a company.

Nicole Forsgren (00:07:51):
Yeah. I love that point because productivity, first of all, is hard to define anyway. But if you're just looking at output, you can get there in a lot of different ways. But if you're getting there in ways that are high toil or high friction, then at some point, a developer is going to burn out. Or if it's super high cognitive load, if it's hard to even think about what you're doing because concentrating on the mechanics of... the plumbing of something, then you don't have the brain space left to come up with really innovative solutions and questions. So I love that it's kind of this self-reinforcing loop in terms of, "You do more work, you do better work." And it's better for people, it's better for the systems, it's better for our customers.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:08:34):
I was going to get to this later, but I want to actually get to this right now, this idea of flow state for engineers. I was an engineer, actually, early in my career. I went to a school for computer science. I was an engineer for 10 years. The best part of the job for me was just this flow state you enter when you're coding and building, and just things feel like so fun. It feels like AI is making that harder in a lot of ways because there's all these agents you're working with now, there's all this code that's kind of being written for you. Talk about just the importance of flow state to a developer, happiness, developer productivity, and just what you've seen AI impacting. How you've seen AI impacting that?

Nicole Forsgren (00:09:07):
Well, there are lots of different ways to talk about DevEx. One way to talk about it is kind of three key things that have components that are important of themselves, and they also kind of reinforce each other. Flow state is one of them, cognitive load is another, and then feedback loops are another. I think when you touch on this... Your question about flow state is a really good one, and I'll admit we're just a few years into this. We're still figuring out what the best flow state and cognitive requirements are for people in this because, to your point, sometimes we're getting interrupted all the time. You don't just get in the flow and lock down, and write a whole bunch of code and do the typing of a whole bunch of code as much anymore. Instead, you're kind of creating a prompt, getting some code back and reviewing the code, trying to integrate what's happening in the system, and that can really interrupt.

(00:10:02):
At the same time though, it can contribute to flow if... I've seen some senior engineers pull together some tool chains that are really incredible, where they figured out how to keep the flow going. The fast feedback loops really, really work well for them. They can kind of assign out different pieces to agents. It helps them keep in the flow in terms of... Instead of details and line-by-line writing, they're in the flow in terms of, "What's my goal? What are the pieces that I need to get there? How quickly can I get there? So then, I can step back and kind of evaluate everything, and then dive back in and fix some pieces."

Lenny Rachitsky (00:10:34):
Is there anything more you could say about this engineer that figured out this really cool workflow, about just what that looks like?

Nicole Forsgren (00:10:39):
I've spoken with a handful of them, and I've kind of watched them work. I haven't built it myself yet. It's on my list. They've been able to set up this really incredible workspace and workflow where... Right now, a lot of us play around with tools and... We'll put in a prompt and we'll get a few lines back or maybe we'll put in a prompt and we'll get whole programs back. Well, what they can do is they can... Many times I'll see them say, to help prime it, "This is what I want to build. It needs to have these basic architectural components. It needs to have this kind of a stack. It needs to follow this general workflow. Help me think that through," and it'll kind of design it for it. And then for each piece, it'll assign an agent to go work on each pace in parallel, and then it'll say and upfront, "These need to be able to work together, make sure it's architected correctly. Make sure we use appropriate APIs and conventions."

(00:11:30):
Then at the end, they can let it run for a few minutes. They can think through something else that's interesting or they anticipate is going to be hairy, and they come back to something that's probably a little better than vibe coded. Because they were so systematic about it upfront, they're much closer to something that looks like production code.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:11:51):
So what I'm hearing is spending a little time upfront planning, what all these AI engineers are doing, versus just powering through and just figuring out as you go.

Nicole Forsgren (00:12:02):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:02):
Okay, cool. Let me get to this quite a core question that I think on is a lot of people's minds. A lot of companies are trying to measure productivity for their teams, "Is this improving our productivity? Is this hurting our productivity?" So let me just start with this question, how are people doing this wrong currently when they try to measure their productivity gains with AI?

Nicole Forsgren (00:12:23):
I'll say most productivity metrics are a lie. It's really tricky because, historically... Now, look, lines of code has always been a bad metric, but many folks still use lines of code-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:12:37):
[inaudible 00:12:37].

Nicole Forsgren (00:12:37):
... yeah, as some proxy as some proxy for output or productivity or complexity or something. Well, now, for many of the systems, that they would sometimes whisper and not super talk about that uses lines of code, it's just blown out of the water because, "What do you mean by lines of code?" If the goal is more lines of code, I can prompt something to write the longest piece of code ever and add tons of comments. We know that agents and LLMs tend to be very verbose by definition, and so it's just too easy to gain that system and then introduce complexity and technical debt into all of the work that you're doing. I will say there are some things that we can kind of watch and pay attention to because... So lines of code as a productivity metric isn't great, it's pretty bad. But now, it's kind of more relevant if we can tease out which code came from people and which code came from AI because now we can answer downstream questions.

(00:13:40):
"What is the code survivability rate? What is the quality of our code? Is our code being fed back into trained systems? And for that code that's retraining systems later, especially if we're doing fine-tuning and local tuning, how much of that is machine generated? What types of loops is that creating, and what types of patterns or biases might it be inadvertently introducing?" On the one hand, it's not good as a productivity metric, but it can be useful. I'll even say the same for DORA. I have done DORA metrics, their speed metrics, their stability metrics. If that's all you're looking at, it's not going to be sufficient anymore because AI has now changed the way we think about feedback loops. They need to be much faster. Now, what DORA's meant for, kind of assessing the pipeline overall in terms of speed and stability. Still, that works. But we can't just blindly apply the existing metrics we've used before because we'll miss super important phenomenon and changes in the way people work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:14:38):
Interesting. You invented DORA, that was kind of the main framework people used for a long time to measure productivity. And then there's SPACE, there's Core 4, there's probably others. So what I'm hearing here is all these are kind of out of date now, where AI is contributing large portions of code.

Nicole Forsgren (00:14:55):
I will say if it is a prescriptive metric, it needs to be used only in the way it was prescribed.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:15:00):
So

Nicole Forsgren (00:15:01):
DORA 4, there are four key metrics. There's two speed metrics, deployment frequency and lead time. So code commit to code deploy. There's stability metrics, MTTR and change fail rate. If those are used to assess the speed of the pipeline and the general performance of the pipeline, that's great. If you're trying to use those to understand... Because implied in that is feedback loops, right, because you used to kind of get feedback from customers. But we can't just use that blindly now when we're using AI, as an example, because we have feedback loops much earlier and not even just at the local build and test phase. We have feedback loops throughout, and even sometimes in the middle of some of the pipeline, that we really want to leverage in ways that weren't as useful before. I won't say they weren't possible, but we just didn't really focus there.

(00:15:53):
So those are prescriptive metrics. When we think about SPACE, SPACE is a framework. It doesn't tell you what metric to use. So I'll say, sometimes people get real frustrated because I didn't tell them what to measure. But now, I think that's the power of it. We're actually seeing that SPACE applies fairly well in these new emerging contexts like AI because we still want to look at... SPACE is an acronym. We still want to look at satisfaction. We still want to look at performance, what's the outcome. We still want to look at activity. Yes, in some ways, lines of code and number of PRs can be useful for something, or number of alerts or number of things, activities or counts. Seize communication and collaboration, this is also super important and useful because it's how our systems communicate with each other, and also how our people do. "What proportion of work is being offloaded to a chat bot versus talking to a senior engineer on the team?" More isn't always better and less isn't always better, it depends.

(00:16:50):
And then efficiency and flow, "Can people get in the flow? How much time does it take to do things? What is the flow like through our system?" Here, I would probably add a couple of dimensions. So chatting with some of the early authors to say trust. Not to say trust wasn't important before, but now it's very, very front of mind. Right? Before you build your code, if the compile comes back, you're fine. And that's the way it is. LLMs are non-deterministic. Right now, we can't just put in a command and guess something back and accept it. We really need to evaluate it, so, "Are we seeing hallucinations? What's the reliability? Does it meet the style that we would typically write? And if it doesn't meet, is that fine?" So it depends on... Prescriptive. You got to make sure you're using it fit for purpose. Right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:17:38):
We're going to get to your current thinking on the best way to do this stuff. You have a book coming out that explains how to do this well, so we're going to get to that. One thing I wanted to highlight in our last chat that we had, you highlighted that one of the biggest issues we're going to probably have with AI is trust, understanding and learning how much to trust the code that it generates, and also how much... you said this, two and a half years ago, that so much of the time is now going to be spent reviewing code versus writing code. That's exactly what I'm hearing.

Nicole Forsgren (00:18:10):
I think it'll be interesting to see how that impacts the way we structure work moving forward. We were talking about flow state and cognitive load. Now that our attention has to focus on things at certain times and it's broken up from how we used to do it, I think there's some real opportunity there to, not just rethink workflows, but rethink how we structure our days and how we structure our work.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:31):
Can you say more about that? Just what is that? What are you thinking will be happening? Where do you think things go? What are you seeing working?

Nicole Forsgren (00:18:37):
This is purely speculative. But for example, Gloria Mark has done some really good work on attention and deep work, and humans can get about four hours of good deep work a day. That's about it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:52):
Yeah,. I feel that.

Nicole Forsgren (00:18:54):
That's kind of the upper limit-ish for the most part, and I'm sure people are going to be like, "Well, I am superhuman and I can do-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:18:59):
What if you take 20 grams of creatine?

Nicole Forsgren (00:19:01):
Right. What if we microdose?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:19:02):
Yeah, exact;y.

Nicole Forsgren (00:19:06):
Yeah. So in the context of knowing we have about four hours of good deep work... I'm sure many of us have probably hit this, right? We have good periods. Maybe it's morning, maybe it's afternoon for folks. And then you hit a time where you're like, "I'm going to clean up my inbox because that is all I can do right now. I can be functional, but I'm not going to come up with my best innovative, problem solving, authoring, code writing work." A lot of times, the way to do that and to get into it is to have these long chunks to get into flow and to get that deep work. Usually, I'm [inaudible 00:19:43] two hours-ish. An hour can be tricky because it could take time to get into that state. Okay. Well, when we think about what it used to be like, back in the old days, three years ago, three and a half years ago, we could block off four hours of time and we could probably get two or three hours of really good work done. Because we were just focused, right? There were no interruptions, minimal interruptions.

(00:20:05):
Now, the nature of writing code and systems itself is interrupt driven or full of interruptions, at least, because you start something and then it interjects. So how do we think about that? Does that mean that a four-hour word block is still useful? Probably. But does that mean that now we can also make a 45-minute work block useful? Because getting into the flow is actually kind of handed off, at least, in part to the machine or the machine can help us get back into the flow by reminding us of context and generating diagrams of the system and all the things. So I think that's a really, really interesting area that's just ripe for questions and opportunity. And please, folks, do this research and come back to me because... It might not make my list, but it's such a great question.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:20:52):
That is so interesting. Essentially, every engineer is turning into an EM, engineering manager, coordinating all of these junior AI engineers. So your point is even if you have a 30-hour block, you can get deep into code, but you can unblock all these AI engineers that are running off doing tasks. Plus, your point is they remind you of just like, "Here's where you left off. Okay. You can just jump into this code, maybe make some tweaks."

Nicole Forsgren (00:21:17):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:21:18):
So interesting. Let me zoom out a little bit and... Before we get into your framework for how to approach developer experience, the latest thinking you've got, beyond just obviously engineers doing more is great, what's your best pitch for why companies should really, really focus on developer experience?

Nicole Forsgren (00:21:37):
I hate to say return of investment, but the business value is... the opportunity here is huge. In general, we write software for fun and for hobbies, but we also have software because it meets a business need. It helps us with market share, it helps us attract and retain customers, it helps us do all of these things. And I think DevEx is important because it enables all of that software creation, it enables all of that problem solving. It enables the super rapid experimentation with customers that... Before, you'd need a while for a prototype and maybe a little bit longer to actually flight it through an A/B test on a production system. You can do it in hours, right now.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:22:21):
Maybe the opposite end of the spectrum, getting very tactical, before we get into the larger framework, what's just one thing that you think an eng team, a product team can do this week, next week to help their developer experience maybe get more done?

Nicole Forsgren (00:22:35):
Honestly, I think the best thing you can do is go talk to people and listen. I love that the audience of this podcast is primarily PMs because they tend to be really good at this. And I would say start with listening and not with tools and automation. So many times companies are like, "Well, I'm just going to build this tool," or, "I'm going to build this thing." Often you build a thing that you yourself have had a challenge with or that is easy to do, easy to automate. And if you just go talk to people and ask the developers like, "Think of yesterday, what did you do yesterday? Walk me through it. What were the points that were just delightful? What were the points that were really difficult? Where did you get frustrated? Where did you get slowed down? Where was there friction?" If you go talk to a handful of people, a lot of times, you can surface a handful of things that are relatively low lift and still have impact or you can identify a process that's unnecessarily complex and slow.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:23:36):
So the listening to, I hear, almost is you want to help your teams move faster and be happier eng teams. Your advice is just, "Before you do anything, just go ask them what is bothering you."

Nicole Forsgren (00:23:46):
Go ask them, yeah. And trust me, most developers are going to be more than happy to tell you what's broken and what's bad. I'll say, there was one company that I had worked with. I remember they had a process that was really difficult and it was on an old mainframe system, and they were going to have to replat the whole thing and so they never went to work on it or talk about it. Everyone hated it because it was this huge delay. I mean, all they had to do was change a process. Sometimes all you have to do is change a process. And they changed it so that instead of... I think someone had to print it out and walk it down three or four flights, and they get approval. And then someone else had to walk it back up, and so it was just that interim. They didn't replat anything. They didn't redesign anything major. They just sent an email.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:24:31):
Let me push on that and... I'm curious just what are the most common things people do. If you're just starting on, "Okay, we need to focus on engineering experience," what do you find are the most... two or three most common improvements companies need to make?

Nicole Forsgren (00:24:45):
I'll say, I'll kind of echo that process, there's almost always a process that can be improved and that can be improved without a lot of engineering lift or a lot of engineering headcount. Most large companies, in particular, have something that is several, several steps. It's the way it is because it's the way it is, but that's no longer the way it is. And even small companies sometimes is just a little too YOLO, and you don't know what it is and you're kind of chasing everyone around. So if you can create a very lightweight process, that can also be helpful. That can be one of the best places to start, especially if you have limited exposure to the whole rest of the org. Sometimes just a team process can help.

(00:25:28):
I will say from a business leader's standpoint, a lot of what you can do is provide structure and support for this organizational change. Communicate what you're doing, communicate what the priorities are, communicate why this is important, to celebrate wins. Because if folks try to do this, just like a one-off side fully-isolated project, it's really challenging to get some good momentum, to get people to care, and to get them stay involved. Because it feels like it's just another internal project that isn't going to matter or that isn't going to get celebrated, but it has these huge upside potential returns for the business.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:10):
It's interesting, what I'm hearing here is nothing about tools or technologies. It's not like move to this cloud, it's not like install this new deployment system, it's processes and people and org and morale.

Nicole Forsgren (00:26:24):
Yeah. Now, there will be technical pieces that are very important, especially now with AI, where we're rethinking how build and test systems work. We're rethinking feedback to users so that it's very, very customized in terms of what is shared and when it is shared. There are a lot of technical pieces that are involved, but that's not the only thing. It's necessary but not sufficient, and that doesn't have to be the place that you start.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:26:50):
I have a hard question I want to ask you that I thought of as you were talking. I feel like this is the question that most founders and heads think about. And the question is just like, how do I know if my eng team is moving fast enough, if they can move faster, if they're just not performing as well as they can? What are just maybe smells, signs that tell you, "Yeah, my team should be moving faster," versus, "This is just the way it works. This is as fast as they can move"?

Nicole Forsgren (00:27:16):
Most teams can move faster, right? Also, given what we know about cognitive load, not all speed gains are necessarily good. Or the upside is going to be kind of limited once you hit kind of a certain point, and most people are not even near that point. I don't know a single team, frankly. But how do you know? You know if you're always hearing about bills breaking, flaky tests, overly long processes, if you have to request a new system or if you need to provision a new environment, or if it's really, really hard to switch tasks or switch projects. So if someone has an opportunity to go work in another part of an org and they don't for reasons that are unclear, and not political, and anyone says anything about the system, that's usually a pretty good smell that there's friction somewhere.

(00:28:20):
Because once you finally figure out your system and you're able to get work done, the switching costs can often be really, really high to go anywhere else. So sometimes people will do that. But I've worked with companies where switching orgs within the company, you had to basically pay the same tax as a new hire because the systems were so different and they were so full of friction, and it was so difficult to do so many things.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:28:49):
I love the first part of your answer especially, which is you can always move faster. I think every founder is going to love hearing that. To your point though, there's diminishing returns over time?

Nicole Forsgren (00:28:58):
Yeah. And you don't know about the quality, right? So I think that's the other side is that you can always move faster, but faster for what? Are we making the right business decisions? And I think that's especially where PMs come in. We can ship trash faster every single day. We need strategy and really smart decisions to know what to ship, what to experiment with, what features we want to do in what order and what rollout. The strategy is the core piece, and then think about speeding that up. If we don't have the other pieces in place, I mean, garbage in, garbage out.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:30):
I want to follow that thread, but before I do that, just to mirror back what you shared. So signs that your team... There's a lot of low-hanging fruit to improve the productivity of your team as builds are always breaking. There's flaky tests are constantly incorrect, false positives. It's hard to context switch between different projects. You just hear people talking about the system, it's just really hard to work with. Is that roughly right?

Nicole Forsgren (00:29:52):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:29:53):
Cool, okay. So going back to the point you just made, there's a sense that AI is making teams so much faster because it's writing all this code for them. You're going to have all these asynchronous agents, engineers working for you. It feels like a core part of your message is that's just a one part of engineering work and there's so much more, including figuring out what to build... an alignment internally. Maybe just speak to just... There is a lot of opportunity to improve engineering performance productivity, but there's so many other elements that are not improved through AI?

Nicole Forsgren (00:30:22):
Yes. Or could be in the future, right?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:30:25):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (00:30:26):
I think there are a lot of ways that we can pull in AI tools to help us refine our strategy, refine our message, think about the experimentation methods or targets of experimentation, or think about our total addressable market, but we need to have that strategy and plan fairly well aligned or at least have two or three alternatives that you want to test. Because now, the engineering can go, or at least the prototyping especially, much, much faster. We can throw out prototypes. We can run any tests and experiments that are customer facing, assuming that we have the infrastructure in place, which allows us to learn and progress much faster before. In some places, it used to take months to get something through production to do A/B testing and get feedback. We can do this in a day or two, definitely under a week. But we want to make sure that we're building and testing the right things, "Are we partnering with the right... Do we have the data that we need?"

(00:31:24):
And I will say AI can actually be a pretty good partner there if you have a good conversation with it, and then also check with you experts, "What type of data should I be looking at? What type of instrumentation do I need? What type of analysis can I do?" Because then, you can also go to your data science team and say, "I'm planning on doing this. I'd like to..." Let's not just YOLO A/B tests because that can be... It's a shame to do a large test and end up disrupting users or disrupting customers, or breaking privacy or security protocols and also end up with data that's unusable because you just can't get the signal that you're looking for. But now, I'm also seeing people kind of accelerate that into a few days versus a few weeks. So they can start those key stakeholder discussions from a much more informed kind of filled out space.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:32:17):
Today's episode is brought to you by Coda. I personally use Coda every single day to manage my podcast and also to manage my community. It's where I put the questions that I plan to ask every guest that's coming on the podcast, it's where I put my community resources, it's how I manage my workflows. Here's how Coda can help you. Imagine starting a project at work and your vision is clear, you know exactly who's what and where to find the data that you need to do your part. In fact, you don't have to waste time searching for anything because everything your team needs from project trackers and OKRs, the documents and spreadsheets lives in one tab all in Coda. With Coda's collaborative all-in-one workspace, you get the flexibility of docs, the structure of spreadsheets, the power of applications, and the intelligence of AI all in one easy-to-organize tab.

(00:33:04):
Like I mentioned earlier, I use Coda every single day. And more than 50,000 teams trust Coda to keep them more aligned and focused. If you're a startup team looking to increase alignment and agility, Coda can help you move from planning to execution in record time. To try it for yourself, go to coda.io/lenny today and get six months free of the team plan for startups. That's C-O-D-A-dot-I-O-slash-Lenny to get started for free and get six months of the team plan, coda.io/lenny.

(00:33:33):
I love that you work with a bunch of different companies and a bunch of different types of businesses. I think very few people get to see inside a lot of different places. What kind of gains are you just seeing in terms of increased productivity with AI? How big of a gain have you seen?

Nicole Forsgren (00:33:49):
I'd say it's real, and I would also say we don't have great measures for it yet. We're still trying to figure out what to measure and what that looks like. One of the best is going to be velocity, all the way through the system, how quickly can you get a feature or a product or something through the system so that you can then experiment a test, either from idea to final end or even kind of a feature and a piece through the system so we can test. That's really good. Now, that's also hard to tie back directly to a particular AI tool in the hands of a particular developer. But there are some other things that we can look at and we can see, and that I've seen is, again, this kind of rapid prototyping.

(00:34:36):
I hate lines of code, but I'm going to use the lines of code. We do see... I know I worked with some folks who had kind of a whole set of companies they were looking at, and they found that AI was generating significantly more code for the people who were using it regularly. But then, they also found that for folks who were regular users of AI coding environments, AI ADEs, the tool kind of gave them more code. And then the engineers themselves, the increase was double what the coding agent had given them. So one, I'd say, probably it's kind of a secondary or knock on or just a smell is it can unblock you. It can speed up the work that you would already do. I know sometimes when I work, the first few minutes, it's hard for me to start. But once I get started, I'm there. So they're really good at unblocking and unlocking that.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:35:32):
Something I've seen people on Twitter sharing is how good OpenAI Codex, especially, is at finding really gnarly bugs. And I think it was Karpathy that shared it. He was so stuck on a bug and, no AI tool could figure it out. And then the latest version of Codex spent an hour or something, looking into it, and found it for him.

Nicole Forsgren (00:35:51):
Yeah. I'm hearing incredible things like that, right? Well, and even also writing unit tests and spinning up unit tests, and creating documentation and cleaning up documentation because I know now people are like, "Oh. Well, we have agents. I don't need to read the docs because there's the code there." It turns out, agents rely on good data because it's all about how they've been trained or how they've been grounded. And better data gives you better outcomes, and some of that data includes documentation and comments. The better documentation and the better comments you have, the better performance you're going to get out of your AI tools.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:29):
And AI can help you write that documentation. I've been working with Devin a little bit, and it's really good at that stuff.

Nicole Forsgren (00:36:34):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:36:36):
Okay. Let's talk about this framework, this book. So you're publishing a book called Frictionless, which sounds like a dream, "How do you create a dev team that's frictionless?" It's called Frictionless: 7 Steps to Remove Barriers, Unlock Value, and Outpace Your Competition in the Age of AI. There's a seven-step process to this. Walk us through this and maybe give us just context on this book, who it's meant for, what problem it solves, and then the seven steps.

Nicole Forsgren (00:37:00):
I will say, I also wrote this with Abi Noda who has just... of DX. He has incredible experience in the space. He's worked with hundreds of companies and so it was kind of nice bouncing ideas off of him. Also, thanks to all of the engineering leads and DevEx leads, and CTOs, and engineers that we talked to to make sure that our smells were right. So who is this book for-

Lenny Rachitsky (00:37:26):
Let me take a tangent on Abi, and DX, since you mentioned him. This is super interesting, and I think it connects so directly with this conversation. Abi started this company called DX, which is such a great name for a company around developer experience. They just sold the company for a billion dollars to Atlassian. It's a very high multiple on their ARR. It, to me, shows exactly why this conversation is so valuable, just how much value companies are putting into improving developer experience. Atlassian would spend a billion dollars on this. It's an early stage-ish startup. It was doing really well and people loved it, but it was like early stage-ish, a billion dollars. And the idea is they have all these companies working using Jira and all their products. They're all trying to figure out how do we measure productivity. It's worth a lot of money to them. And I know you were an early advisor to them too, so-

Nicole Forsgren (00:37:26):
Yeah.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:38:15):
... it just shows us how important this is.

Nicole Forsgren (00:38:17):
Yeah. Well, I think it also shows us how much value you can get out of this. There's so much low-hanging fruit, there's so much unlocked potential, and it's hard to know where to start a lot of times even in... I've been at large companies that have a lot of expertise and a lot of really, really smart people. But if you haven't kind of been in this space and thinking about it this way, it's hard to know where to start or it's easy to make simple mistakes up front that mean you kind of need to start over later. So I guess it also brings us back to, "Who is this book for?" It's for anyone that cares about DevEx, so definitely technology leaders, anyone who's trying to kick off a DevEx program, or is working on a DevEx DevEx improvement program. I think it's particularly relevant for PMs because if you're PMing something that involves software building and creating software, improving DevEx will only help your team. And also, you have key skills and insights and instincts that are so important to DevEx that many times, I will say, I've seen engineering teams just miss.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:39:31):
Okay. What's the framework? What are the steps? Where do people start?

Nicole Forsgren (00:39:35):
The book goes through a seven-step process, and then also kind of provides some key kind of principles at the end. Step one is to start the journey. So assuming you're kicking off, you can start the journey. And this involves what we have already talked about. Go talk to people, have a listening tour, synthesize what you learn, visualize the workflow and tools, get a handle on what the current state is. Step two is to get a quick win. So start small, get a quick win, pick the right projects, share out what you've done. Step three is using data to optimize the work. So establish some of your data foundation, find the data that's there, start collecting new data, use some surveys for some really fast insights and may include example surveys. Step four then is to decide strategy and priority. Once you have some data, then you need to know of all the things that are potentially broken. And if you've already gotten your quick win of all the things that are left, "What should I do next?" So we walk through some evaluation frameworks there.

(00:40:43):
Step five is to sell your strategy. Once you've decided, now you have to kind of convince everyone else. So now you want to get feedback, you want to share why this is the right strategy right now. Step six is to drive change at your scale. So here, we address folks that have local scope of control. If you're starting on just a dev team, you want to do it yourself, kind of grassroots effort or global scope of control. If you're the VP of developer experience or something, there are some things that you can leverage for a top down, and then how do you drive change when you're kind of somewhere in the middle, because you can leverage both types of strategies. And then step seven is to evaluate your progress and show value, and then kind of loop back around.

(00:41:27):
I will say that we wrote this so that you could kind of jump into any step wherever you are right now. If you're kicking off a team or an initiative, you'll probably want to start at step one. You should definitely start at step one. If you're joining an existing initiative, you could jump into picking the priority or implementing the changes. So those are the seven steps. There's a seven steps, there are a few practices that we also recommend. So thinking about resourcing it, change management, making technology sustainable, and then also bringing a PM lens to this, "How can we think about developer experience as a product, and how do we think about the metrics that we have as a product?"

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:13):
Awesome, okay. I have questions. Point people to the book real quick. What's the URL? How do they get it? When does it come out?

Nicole Forsgren (00:42:18):
Yeah, developerexperiencebook.com. Right now, you can sign up for the mailing list. We'll let you know when it's out on pre-order, and we'll also be sharing pieces of the workbook. So we've got almost a hundred page workbook that goes along with the book, and then it should be out by end of year.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:36):
Okay. So one piece of this is just this term developer experience feels very intentional in that it's not developer productivity, developer work. It's how do we make developer experiences better at our company, which includes they get more done, but also they're happier and things like that. So I think that's an important element of this, right?

Nicole Forsgren (00:42:55):
Yeah, absolutely.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:42:55):
Okay.

Nicole Forsgren (00:42:56):
Because, again, it's not just about productivity. We talked about this from the frame and the lens of, "We need to be building the right thing." And you want to be productive, but you also want to be thinking about... and this is what engineers are also just really incredibly good at, give them a problem and don't tell them how to solve it, and then they can solve it better. They have the freedom, they have the innovation, they have the creativity so that they can solve this problem. If it's only about productivity, then it's just lines of code or number PRs or whatever. But we really want to talk about value and how do we unlock value, and how do we get value faster. And that involves, yes, making them more productive and removing friction because then, they have the flow and the cognitive load and the things that we kind of talked about.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:43:41):
Awesome, okay. And then say someone wants to start this team, what does it usually look like. At Airbnb, I remember this team forming. It was just like an engineer or two, getting it started and taking charge. What do you recommend as the pilot team, and then what does it look like as it grows?

Nicole Forsgren (00:43:57):
There are a few ways to do this, right? So if you're doing it yourself, you could do it with a couple of engineers, maybe a PM or a PGM or a TPM to kind of help communicate. Because really, comms plans are just so important here. On a small scale, what we want to do is look for those quick wins, look for things that you can do at small scale. Some folks call them things like paper cuts. There small things that you can do to help people see the value and feel the benefit themselves, "How can a developer's work get better? How can their day-to-day work get better? Kind of build momentum from there?" If you're working from a top-down structure and you have the remit, you still want some quick wins, but those quick wins can look a little more global in scale because you have the infrastructure or the backing to make different types of changes that aren't only local.

(00:44:56):
So an example of a small local change could be just cleaning up your tests, your test suites. Any team could do that, any team could do that. At more global scale, it might be changing organization-wide process that is just overly cumbersome or throwing some resourcing into cleaning up the provisioning environment.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:45:15):
Okay. What kind of impact have you seen from teams like this forming, on the engineering teams at their companies?

Nicole Forsgren (00:45:21):
I'll say I've seen a huge impact for smaller companies, hundreds of thousands of dollars for large companies or in the billions. Well, also, we need to learn how to communicate that, "What does the math look like?" Many times, we can look at saving time, we can look at saving costs, we can look at a lot of different things. We can look at speed to value as speed to market. We can look at risk reduction, but the gains really are there. I will mention that it tends to follow something like the J-curve. So you'll have a couple of quick wins and it'll look like a big win, and then you'll hit kind of a little divot where suddenly the really obvious projects, the low-hanging fruit are handled. So now, we need to do a little bit of work. We might need to build out a little bit more infrastructure. We might need to build out a little more telemetry, so that we can capture the things we want to capture. And then once we get that done, then we start to see those benefits really compound.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:46:16):
So going back to that measurement number, what do you recommend? How do people find these numbers? Because I think that's so much of the power of this is like, "We saved a million dollars doing this." What do you look at to figure that out?

Nicole Forsgren (00:46:28):
I think there are a few different things to keep in mind, like who is our key audience, and we usually have a few key audiences. We really want to be able to speak to developers because they're the ones that are going to be using the systems. They'll be partnering with you on either building them or at least providing feedback about what you're doing. So for them, we often want to frame this in terms of things they care about. So time savings. If something gets faster, they can save time. They don't spend time doing setup when they don't need to anymore, related to status reduced toil. So compliance and security are super important. Also, many times it requires several manual steps that... I don't say they're not value add. They're not value add from an individual human perspective. If we can automate as much as possible, that's great, and improved focus time.

(00:47:22):
That's from the developer side of you. Leadership often cares about... They care about those things, but they often care more about other things. So we could talk about usually costs in dollars, "Can we accelerate revenue? What does our time to value look like? What is our velocity? How quickly can we get feedback from customers?" And for folks and organizations that are in really competitive environments, that can be really compelling because it's all about speed. We could talk about saving money. Here, we can look at maybe quantifying savings. One example is test and build. If we can clean up a test and build suite to a developer, they really want to hear about time saved and more reliable systems. There's less toil because they don't have to keep re-running tests or kind of go clean up test suites.

(00:48:13):
From the business perspective, cleaning up a test in a build suite can be cloud cost savings because all of those tests are running somewhere on a cloud. And if they always fail or if it's just kind of a waste of spend, that can be useful, recovering some capacity. We can always talk about time and productivity gains, "How much equivalent developer time are we losing on things that are not necessarily value add?" And then sometimes we can correlate to business outcomes and correlate is usually the best we can do here, but there can be some pretty compelling correlations in terms of speeding up time to value and increase market share, for example.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:48:54):
Let me follow that thread and come back to this, what I think is the biggest question people have right now with AI and productivity, and I don't think anyone has the answer yet, but I'm curious to get your take of just what should people do today? What's the best approach to understanding what impact AI tools are having on their productivity? Because they're spending all this money on there. I don't know, what are we getting out of this? So I guess things are moving faster, but I don't know. So if someone had to just like, "Okay, here's what I should probably try to do," what would be your best advice here for measuring the impact of AI tools on productivity?

Nicole Forsgren (00:49:28):
I would say it depends. In part, it depends on what your leadership chain really cares about. We are usually pretty good at figuring out what matters to developers and we could communicate that to them. But if we're trying to just identify two or three data points to really kind of focus on, because when we're first starting with data, sometimes it can be challenging, what do they care about? Think about the messaging you've been hearing. Have they been talking about market share? Losing market share or competitiveness in the marketplace, if that's it, focus on speed. Think about ways that you can capture metrics for speed from feature to production or feature to customer or feature to experiment and what that feedback loop looks like if they're talking about profit margin all the time.

(00:50:18):
Now, we always talk about money because this is business. But if that seems to be an overarching narrative, look for ways that you can save money and then translate that into recovered and recouped headcount cost. Or sometimes you'll reinvent, change a process, and then you no longer need as many vendors. So reductions in vendor spent can also help there. I say also it depends because sometimes they'll say something, leadership will say something, and it kind of comes up as a theme. If you could solve a problem that they have or it's something that they're focused on, if you can slightly reframe it even, like if they're calling everything developer productivity, go ahead and call it productivity. If they're calling it velocity, and velocity is what matters to them, think about how to frame this in terms of velocity. If they're talking about transformation or disruption, how does this help with the disruption? Because then, it will resonate with them. We don't want to make them work to understand what it is that we're doing and the value that we provide.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:51:20):
That is such good advice. Just to reflect back, the advice here is if your company's trying to figure out what sort of impact are AI tools having on our company, first, it's just like, what does the company care about most? What do leaders care about most? Could be market share, could be profit margin, could be velocity. We need higher velocity or we need to transform, transformation. So your advice there is figure that out based on words and phrases you're hearing. Then figure out ways to measure that, ways to measure market share growing, profit margin increasing. I love these examples, like time from feature, idea to production or to experiment, so maybe start tracking that. If it's margin, it's money saved by fewer tests, failing or some vendor you don't have to pay for, things like that. And then velocity, I imagine that's where things like DORA come in of just speed of engineering, shipping, or... What would you think about there for velocity?

Nicole Forsgren (00:52:16):
I would say it's actually one of those... I would pick as broad a swathe as you can. So if you can go from idea to customer or idea to experiment, how long does that take? How long does it typically take, and how long can it take, and does it take now with improved use of AI tooling and reduction in friction? That's where I will say, we talk about this a little bit in the book, how do we deal with attribution challenges? What was responsible for this? Was it the DevEx or was it AI? Go ahead and disclose that. Say, "Yes, we rolled out AI tools. We also had this effort in DevEx. They partnered very closely together." Both of them probably contributed to this, right? If we had AI tools without the DevEx improvements, we probably would've had some improvements, but not nearly as much.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:53:00):
If people were starting to do this today, say they're just like, "I want to start measuring developer experience," are there a two or three metrics everybody basically needs they should just start measuring ASAP?

Nicole Forsgren (00:53:10):
If you're just starting today and if you have nothing at all, talk to people, obviously. After that, I would do surveys because surveys can give you a nice overall view of the landscape quickly so that you know where the big kind of challenges are. I say that because if you're just starting, you might not have instrumentation through your system, all the metrics. And if you do already, it might not be what you think you want. Metrics that were designed without purpose, questionable. Metrics that were designed for another purpose, they might work for what you want, but they might not, so we can't just assume we have them. That's one reason I like surveys, and we include an example in the book. You can just ask a few questions, "How satisfied are you? What are the biggest barriers to your productivity, or what are the biggest challenges to getting work done?" and let them pick either from a set of tools or maybe a set of processes and then say... Let them pick three, just three.

(00:54:12):
Of those three, how often does this affect you? Is this hourly? Is this daily? Is this weekly? Is this quarterly? Because sometimes it hits you every single day, and you're just mad about it. Sometimes it only hits you once a quarter because it's end of quarter, but it's so onerous, and then kind of open text, like, "Is there anything else we should know?" That can give you incredible signal because by making folks prioritize the top three things... Let them pick everything, it makes the data super, super messy. But three things and how often, you can just come up with a score or a weighted score if you want, and then go kind of dig into, where should that data be? What data do we need? But also, then you've got at least some kind of baseline. It'll be a subjective baseline, but now you'll know what the biggest challenges are.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:55:04):
I love how all this just comes back just starting by talking to people and asking them these things, which is very similar to product management and just building great products is, have you talked to your customers? Everyone thinks they're doing this, but most people are not doing this enough.

Nicole Forsgren (00:55:17):
And I will say one thing that's challenging when you think about getting data, so interviews are data and that's important, surveys are a little more quantified because we can turn it into counts, but that's where we also want to be careful. A lot of folks go to write a survey question and they'll say something like, "Were the build and test system slow or complicated in the last week?" You're asking four different questions there. If someone answers yes, was it the build? Was it the test? Was it slow or was it flaky or complicated or something? So it can be really difficult to untangle what the signal is you're actually getting there, and so it is worth the time chatting with someone who's familiar with survey design, having a conversation with Claude or Gemini or ChatGPT around, "Here are the survey questions. Or can you propose some?" And then make sure you take a couple of rounds. Is this a good survey question? What questions can I answer from the data that I get? What problems could I solve? If you can't answer a question with data, don't get it.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:22):
And you have example surveys in your book for folks that want to just copy and paste and not have to think about this much.

Nicole Forsgren (00:56:28):
Yeah, example surveys, a lot of example questions. We even recommend what the format, what the flow should look like, how long it should be, how long it should not be.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:56:37):
One thing that I was reading is that you don't love happiness surveys specifically, asking engineers how happy they are, is that true? If so, why is that?

Nicole Forsgren (00:56:45):
I don't, no. Well, I'll say I don't love a happiness survey because there are too many things that contribute to happiness. Happiness is a lot, right? So happiness is work, happiness is family, happiness is hobbies, happiness is weekends, happiness... There are so many things that contribute to happiness. Now, that doesn't mean I don't care about happiness. I think happiness surveys are not particularly useful here. What can be helpful is satisfaction and people are like, "That's the same thing." It's not because you can ask, "Are you satisfied with this tool?" and then ask some follow-up questions. Now, those two are related because the more satisfied you are with your job and your tools and the work and your team, it contributes to happiness. I used to joke... Remember the golf commercials like, "Happy cows like happy cheese"?

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:35):
No.

Nicole Forsgren (00:57:35):
I had a Calabrian. That was the best. Happy devs make happy code. They write better programs, they do better work, they're better team members and collaborators. But capturing and trying to directly influence happiness, that's not what we are here for. It's too challenging, it's too all-encompassing. Satisfaction can give us some signal.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:57:59):
In a totally different direction, in terms of just tools you see people using, are there any that just like, "Oh, yeah, this one's really commonly great." For people, this is just a tool people are finding a lot of success with. There's the common ones, Copilot, Cursor. I don't know. Is there anything that stands out that you want to share, just like, "Hey, you should check this tool out. People seem to love it"?

Nicole Forsgren (00:58:21):
I think they're huge, right? Copilot, Cursor, Gemini.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:25):
Claude Code.

Nicole Forsgren (00:58:26):
Yep, Claude Code. I love Claude Code.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:30):
I have a whole post coming on ways to use Claude Code for non-engineering use cases.

Nicole Forsgren (00:58:35):
Cool. Nice.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:36):
It's so interesting. For example, Claude Code, "Find ways to clean up storage on my laptop," and it just tells you there's a bunch of files. It's just like ChatGPT running on your computer and you could do all kinds of crazy stuff on your computer for you, like a mini God.

Nicole Forsgren (00:58:36):
I'm going to do that now. This is great.

Lenny Rachitsky (00:58:57):
It's so good. Yeah, that's why I'm writing this. I had Dan Shipper was on the podcast and he said Claude Code is the most underrated AI tool out there because people don't realize what it's capable of. It's not just for coding, and that's what I'm trying to explore more and more. Okay. Is there anything else that you think would be valuable to help people improve their developer experience, help them adapt to this new world of AI and engineering that we haven't covered?

Nicole Forsgren (00:59:22):
I think something that's important to think about in general is to bring a product mindset to any type of DevEx improvements that are happening, and also the metrics that we collect and capture. By that, I mean we want to identify a problem, make sure we're solving a problem for a set of users. We want to think about creating MVPs and experiments and get fast feedback, do some rapid iteration. We want to have a strategy. We want to know who our addressable market is. We want to know what success is. We want to basically have a go-to-market function. We need to have comms. We need to get continuous feedback from our customers. We want to keep improving. And, at some point, we want to think about sunsetting something. Is it in maintenance mode? Is it sun setting?

(01:00:12):
And I think that's important in general, but I think it's extra important now because when we have AI tools, we're using AI tools, we're embedding AI into our products, things are changing so rapidly that it can be really important to take half a beat and say, "Okay, what's the problem I'm trying to solve right here? Is this metric that we've had for the last 10 years still important or should this be sunset because it's not really important anymore? It's not driving the types of decisions and actions that I need."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:00:40):
Before we get to our exciting lightning round, I want to take us to AI Corner, which is a recurring segment on this podcast. Is there some way that you've found a use for an AI tool in your life, in your work that you think might be fun to share, that you think might be useful to other people?

Nicole Forsgren (01:00:55):
I have been working on some home design and redecorating rooms and stuff. I'm working with a designer because I know what I like, but I don't know how to get there, I'm not good at this. But I've really been loving ChatGPT and Gemini especially to render pictures for me, so I can give it the floor plan, I can give it one shot of the room that's definitely not what it's supposed to look like, and then I can give it pictures of a couple different things, and then I can just tell it change the walls or change the furniture layout or change something. It helps me and it's relatively quick. It helps me kind of visualize the things... Again, I know what I like, but I don't know how to get there, so I know if I like it or not, which is probably a very random use, but it's fun for now.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:01:41):
My wife does exactly the same thing. She's sending me constantly, "Here's what this rug will look like in our living room. Here's this water feature." It's so good and it keeps getting better. It's just like, "Wow, that's exactly our house with this new rug," and all you do is just upload these two photos and just like, "Cool. How would this look in our room?"

Nicole Forsgren (01:01:57):
Yeah, I've been impressed a couple times. Definitely the machines are listening to us. It's given me a mock-up of a room or something and then it throws in a dog bed, because I have dogs. I'm like, "I did not tell you to do that, but yeah, that's probably the color and style of dog bed that I should have in this room."

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:13):
Speaking of that, have you tried this use case, ask ChatGPT, "Generate an image of what you think my house looks like based on everything you know about me."

Nicole Forsgren (01:02:22):
I haven't.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:23):
Because it has memory and it remembers everything you've talked about, and it's hilarious. You got to do it.

Nicole Forsgren (01:02:29):
Okay, that's on my to-do list.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:31):
There we go. Bonus use case. Nicole, with that, we've reached our very exciting lightning round. I've got five questions for you. Are you ready?

Nicole Forsgren (01:02:38):
Awesome. Let's go.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:02:39):
What are two or three books that you find yourself recommending most to other people?

Nicole Forsgren (01:02:43):
Outlive by Peter Attia is fantastic. Another one that's I guess maybe related, I hurt my back so it's not great, Back Mechanic by Stuart McGill is incredible. Shout out to anyone who has hurt lower back. It's for a lay person to read through and figure out how to fix lower back problems. It's kind of a random one. I will say I love How Big Things Get Done. I can't pronounce the names. I think one's... There's Scandinavian, one is. It kind of dissects really large projects through recent-ish history and where they failed and why. And I think it's really interesting for us to think about, especially now in this AI moment where basically all of our at least software systems are going to be changing. So how do we think about approaching what is essentially going to be a very large project? And then, sorry, I'm going to throw in a bonus one, The Undoing Project by Michael Lewis. Matt Velloso recommended it to me, and it's so good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:42):
Yes, I read that-

Nicole Forsgren (01:03:44):
I audibly gasped at the last sentence.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:46):
Oh. I was like, "What?"

Nicole Forsgren (01:03:47):
I was [inaudible 01:03:48]. Yeah, I was not expecting it.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:03:49):
I read that and I do not remember that last sentence. Oh, man. Okay, cool. Next question. Do you have a favorite movie or TV show you recently watched and enjoyed?

Nicole Forsgren (01:03:57):
I'll say I watch Love Is Blind. If I got to shut down at the end of the day, Love Is Blind is fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:02):
There's a new season out.

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:03):
Yeah, very excited... and Shrinking. Have you seen Shrinking?

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:07):
No. I think I started The Therapist and yeah, I gave it a shot.

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:12):
Strongly recommend it. It's cute.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:13):
Sweet. Is there a product you've recently discovered that you really love? Could be an app, could be some kitchen gadgets, some clothing.

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:21):
Yeah, the Ninja Creami is-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:25):
Did you say this last time?

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:25):
I don't know. I may have. I don't think so.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:29):
Somebody said this and I still remember it. It's like-

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:30):
It's so good.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:31):
... you make ice cream and stuff with it, right?

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:33):
Yeah, and you can basically freeze a protein shake and then it turns it into ice cream-

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:37):
Oh, man.

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:37):
... which is delicious. Another one is a Jura coffee maker. I'd love good coffee and I'm not great at making it, so I can just push the button and it'll give me anything I want, including lattes, cappuccinos or anything. So that's kind of fun.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:51):
Sweet, okay. Do you have a favorite-

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:54):
Just sugar and caffeine. I just need a power through the day.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:04:57):
There's the engineering productivity 101.

Nicole Forsgren (01:05:01):
Yes.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:01):
Oh, man. Okay, two more questions. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often find useful in work or life and come back to in various ways?

Nicole Forsgren (01:05:09):
Yeah, I think one that's come up a couple times, it's not a verbatim thing, I think it's more the vibe, hindsight is 2020, but it's also really dumb. I think if we made the best decision we could at the time with the information that we had available, then it is what it is. If you make a bad decision because you made a bad decision and you knew better, you had the information, not great. I don't think we give ourselves or other people enough grace because we always end up finding more information out later.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:05:42):
Hear, hear. Final question. I was going to ask you something else, but as we are preparing for this, you shared that you have a new role at Google. Maybe just talk about that, what you're up to there, why you joined Google, anything folks should know.

Nicole Forsgren (01:05:53):
Sure. I am senior director of developer intelligence and core developer. It's super exciting and super fun because of all of these things we've been talking about. It's focused on Google and all their properties and their underlying infrastructure, how can we improve developer experience, developer productivity, velocity, all of these things we've been talking about and, because kind of the numbers person, how do we want to think about measuring it, how does measurement change, how do feedback loops change, how can we improve the experience throughout and then kind of drive that change through an organization in ways that are meaningful and impactful and faster than they've been before.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:06:33):
Nice job, Google, getting Nicole. What a win. I need to get some more Google stock ASAP. Okay, two follow-up questions. Where can folks find you online and find your book online if they want to dig deeper? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Nicole Forsgren (01:06:47):
Online, you can find the book at developerexperiencebook.com, I'm at nicolefv.com, and LinkedIn occasionally. Sometimes it's a mess. I try to wade through all of the noise. I get there to be useful, sign up for the book and the workbooks. The workbooks are free. I'd love to get any kind of feedback on what works, what doesn't. I always love hearing those kind of stories.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:15):
Nicole, thank you so much for being here.

Nicole Forsgren (01:07:17):
Thanks for having me, Lenny.

Lenny Rachitsky (01:07:19):
My pleasure. Thanks, again. Bye, everyone.

(01:07:23):
Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Nicole Forsgren (00:00:00):
Starting with what is your problem or what is your goal? I would say this is a bigger challenge than most people recognize or realize. 80% of the folks that I work with, this is their biggest problem. Even at executive levels, teams will have gone off for several months, and they're tackling something, and they'll come back with uncertainty, and they'll say like, "Well, you told me to improve developer experience."

(00:00:20):
I'm like, "Okay, what do you mean by this? Are you talking about inner and outer loop? Are you talking about friction? Are you talking about culture? But if you're talking about culture, this is totally different than if you're talking about friction in toolchains. If you're on different pages, you're heading in completely different directions."

Lenny (00:00:37):
Welcome to Lenny's Podcast where I interview world-class product leaders and growth experts to learn from their hardware experiences, building and growing today's most successful products. Today my guest is Nicole Forsgren. This is actually my first recording back since going on pat leave for the past couple months, and what an awesome episode to get back into the swing of things. Nicole is the developer productivity expert, having written the award-winning book Accelerate, and she's been the co-author of the State of DevOps Report year after year.

(00:01:06):
She's currently a partner at Microsoft Research, leading developer productivity, research, and strategy, and she's helped some of the biggest companies in the world move faster, improved product quality, and transform their cultures. In our conversation, we get into the weeds of how to go about measuring and improving your engineering team's productivity and experience. We talk about the DORA framework and the SPACE framework and how to actually implement them to understand how your engineering team is doing.

(00:01:32):
Nicole also shares benchmarks for what elite companies are at. We talk about why moving faster turns out to be one of the best ways to improve quality and stability. Plus, pitfalls you want to avoid, and also a preview of a new book that she's working on, and so much more. Enjoy this episode with Nicole Forsgren after a short word from our sponsors. Today's entire episode is brought to you by DX, a platform for measuring and improving developer productivity. DX is designed by the researchers behind frameworks such as DORA SPACE and DevX, including Nicole Forsgren, who is my guest for this very episode.

(00:02:09):
If you've tried measuring developer productivity, you know that there are a lot of basic metrics out there and a lot of ways to do this wrong, and getting that full view of productivity is still really hard. DX tackles this problem by combining qualitative and quantitative insights based on the very research Nicole and her team have done, giving you full clarity into how your developers are doing. DX is used by both startups and Fortune 500 companies, including companies like Twilio, Amplitude, eBay, Brex, Toast, Pfizer, and Procter & Gamble. To learn more about DX and get a demo of their product, visit their website at getdx.com/lenny. That's getdx.com/lenny. Nicole, welcome to the podcast.

Nicole Forsgren (00:02:54):
Thank you so much. I'm excited to be here.

Lenny (00:02:56):
I'm excited to have you here. I actually skip this question usually with guests, but I thought it'd be actually really valuable to spend a little time on your background. You have such a unique role and unique set of experiences. Could you just talk briefly about the things you've been up to in your career, where you've worked, and then what you're up to now and what you focus on these days?

Nicole Forsgren (00:03:15):
Sure, and I appreciate the question because you're right. I sort of had this choose your own adventure background. So I started as a software engineer at IBM. I was writing software for large enterprise systems, which meant I ended up running them. So I was also a CIS admin. I was racking the stacking. I was running these really, really large labs, and then I kind of stumbled into this seven-day march for several years, and I was like, "There has to be a better way." And we're hearing rumors of it, but management was not buying in. And so I decided to win this battle with data, and I was like, "I should go do a Ph.D."

(00:03:55):
And so ended up kind of taking a slight pivot into Ph.D. and management information systems, which some people are less familiar with, but it's basically a cross between tech and business. And I ended up getting a fairly technical Ph.D. So I went to a school, I went to University of Arizona, which has a very, very technical degree, but I liked that it crossed with business because then I had the ability to make these strong business case statements, right. So it was like, how is or is the way that we develop and deliver software tied to outcomes at the individual level, right?

(00:04:33):
Can I be more productive? Can I have better work-life balance? And the team level, is the team more productive? Is the team more efficient? And the organizational level, right. This is what I was really interested in originally. Do I see better ROI? Do I see better efficiency because then I could sell it to people, right? And so that was really kind of what I originally went into. And then I was a professor for a handful of years because if you're doing research, traditionally, that's the job in academia. I also had a master's in accounting because that really helped me make that kind of financial tie and understanding financial statements.

(00:05:07):
And then, after a handful of years kind of walked away from tenure because academia was not convinced that DevOps was a thing, right, that DevOps wasn't real, and State of DevOps Report who I was doing with DORA, DevOps research and assessment in collaboration with Jez Humble and Gene Kim. And we started that work with Puppet. So shout out to Alanna Brown for starting that, and Nigel Kersten and the team there. We kind of pivoted away. And Chef, that little configuration management startup at the time, hired me, and they're like, "We'll give you halftime to do research and halftime to help our engineering practices improve."

Lenny (00:05:45):
That's cool.

Nicole Forsgren (00:05:46):
Yeah. I mean, they were incredible because what startup is going to be like, "Yeah, do research." So I was there for a year and a half and then left to do DORA full-time. We actually had a SaaS offering, so we continued the State of DevOps Report just under the DORA banner, and we had a SaaS offering because so many large companies were like, "I want my own customized measurement, reading, and report." And then the joke there when we met with Gartner, they were like, "Your superpower here was that you tricked people into strategy," which was not only how do I benchmark? That was kind of our top-of-the-funnel. Everyone wants to know how they compare.

(00:06:22):
But the important thing is what should you do next? What's the most important next step? So it's how do I measure? What do I do next? And that gave me this incredible view into advising large organizations into this transformation journey. And then, we built out this amazing partner network. We weren't actually consulting. We just had this SaaS piece, but then how do you act on it? We were then acquired by Google, so I was CEO. And so I kind of led that acquisition and then the integration and building out these teams in Google. And after that point, I joined GitHub, which is the largest developer network.

(00:07:01):
So I had this amazing opportunity to do more grounded and applied research again. I was VP of research and strategy and then went over to MSR, where I kind of wear a couple of hats. So right now, I have a research lab there with an incredible team. It's the developer experience lab where we do a bunch of work across productivity, community, and wellbeing. And then I also help with Microsoft's kind of cross company effort to improve their developer infrastructure. So it's sort of this round effort into how do I really remain engaged in measuring, applying, thinking about this work, both in very applied concrete pieces and incredibly forward-looking work with MSR.

Lenny (00:07:48):
Amazing. And just to clarify, MSR, is that Microsoft? That's a division-

Nicole Forsgren (00:07:52):
Ah.

Lenny (00:07:52):
... of Microsoft.

Nicole Forsgren (00:07:53):
Yeah. Thank you. Yeah, MSR is Microsoft Research.

Lenny (00:07:54):
Okay, cool. So you've shared a couple of these terms, DevOps, developer productivity. I'm curious what the term you like to use for this area you focus on. Developer productivity, developer experience, DevOps, what's kind of the way the best way to think about this?

Nicole Forsgren (00:08:10):
I really love that you asked this question because I think they're very related concepts that people sometimes conflate, but I see them as being different. So related, but different. So productivity, I think, is basically how much we can get done and how much we can do over time. And I think that's why it's so important to have this holistic measure because we can't just brute force it, right. And so that's why when my team and a bunch of my peers study productivity, we include this community effect because software is a team sport. We joke, right.

(00:08:40):
And also why wellbeing is so important, right. Because we see that when you do productivity the right way, we see sustainability, we see wellbeing, we see reductions in burnout. Now, developer experience is very related and very tied to this, and it contributes to productivity. But developer experiences, if you think about who your users are, developers really are you your users in this software engineering, in the software development piece. And so developer experience is sort of like what is it like to write software? Is this a friction-free process? Is this a very predictable and certain experience? Can we reduce this uncertainty and increase the predictability here to contribute to productivity?

Lenny (00:09:26):
And then how does DevOps fit into that just so that we kind of have the mental model of these terms?

Nicole Forsgren (00:09:31):
People have sort of co-opted the term. So some people name their tools DevOps. I'm maybe a little more old school. So when I was doing a bunch of my DevOps research, it was the capabilities and tools and processes that we can use to improve our software development and delivery end to end so that it's faster and it is more reliable. So DevOps was kind of this technical, architectural, cultural practices that enable us to do this work better so that it is, yes, more productive, we have a better developer experience. It was kind of, again, this very holistic picture.

Lenny (00:10:06):
So what I love about this topic is that I've never met a founder or a leader who is not thinking, "We need to move faster. We need our engineers to be more productive. We need to get things out the door quicker. We want engineers to be happier." Nobody doesn't want that. And so that's why I'm excited to dig into a lot of these things. Is that roughly what you find as well, that nobody's ever like, "We're good. We don't need any of this. We don't need to focus on this area?"

Nicole Forsgren (00:10:32):
You know what, I'll say yes and, right. So and it kind of goes back to why I got into this because, on the one hand, you won't say anyone who's saying, "Uh, we don't really need to go faster. Everything's fine." But at the same time, very often, I will come into scenarios where I'll find myself in scenarios where people are like, "I mean, it would be nice if we were going faster, but do we really need to. Show me the business case. What's the ROI?" Or if we go too fast, we'll have an instability, right. What are our safety measures? Are we going to lose reliability? What is happening?

(00:11:13):
And when I first started ITIL and ITSM, right, the old school kind of change management processes, the common knowledge was that you had to have at least a two-week wait for change approvals in order to get that stability. Turns out that's not right. It was just kind of an old wives' tale, right. And so we kind of have this weird balance of I want to move faster, but is it worth the investment? What am I going to get for it? Are you sure this is the priority? Or I've been in meetings where it's like, "Oh yes, absolutely, right. This is a priority, but it's the lowest priority."

(00:12:00):
And I'm like... Right. So then what we want to do is we want to have these kind of pointed conversations or these kind of Socratic type questions and conversations where it's like, "Help me understand more what your concerns are. Are your concerns around reliability when you move faster?" We're not just trying to all the guardrails down and sprint for no purpose of sprinting. And this is where kind of the DORA and DevOps research program comes into play where it's we don't just want to move fast and take all guardrails down.

(00:12:33):
We want to implement good technical practices like automated testing, good architectural practices so that when you move fast, you are also more stable, right. We want to be thinking about improving the developer experience so that when we are faster, we are also saving time. And then, we can highlight a handful of statistics. Like, what is your typical time for feature delivery? What is your typical time to first PR? What is your typical time to steady state productivity?

(00:13:04):
What is your typical time for code review and PR process? And if we are to do back-of-the-napkin math, what sorts of time are you spending here? And if we do a rough look at industry, what are your peers spending here? And are we losing time, right? And if we could turn this into a value calculation, what does that look like? So that we can think about the priority and the strategy here. And I think that's where it becomes a more focused conversation.

Lenny (00:13:43):
This is a great segue too, something I was going to get to a little bit later, but let's just get into it, which is the DORA framework, and then there's also the SPACE framework. Could you just talk about what these two are when you use one versus the other, and then how that essentially helps you measure and then improve productivity and developer experience?

Nicole Forsgren (00:14:01):
Sure, sure. Absolutely. And I'm so glad you brought this up. So DORA is, it's an entire research program. Now, many people, when they hear DORA now they think of the Four Keys or the DORA four or the four metrics, and I think that's what the research program and the company ended up becoming most known for. And so that was the software delivery performance metrics, and those are, there's two speed and two stability metrics. So the speed metrics are lead time, so how long does it take to get from code committed to code running in production? Deployment frequency. How often do you deploy code?

(00:14:40):
And then the stability metrics are MTTR, mean time to restore. So if something happens, how long does it take you to come back? And then change fail rate. For every change that is pushed, what's the rough percentage of incidents or that require human intervention, right? Now the thing that was really interesting is when we started measuring these, we found that they move in tandem now with very strong significance from a statistical standpoint. Now what this means is now, we say speed and stability move together.

(00:15:19):
Most people only think about this from the speed standpoint, which means when you move faster, you are more stable, which means you're pushing smaller changes more often, right. Because if you're pushing all the time, it's going to be very, very small changes, which means you have a smaller blast radius, which means when you push, you have an error in production. It's going to be easier to debug, right. It's going to be much easier to figure all of that out your mean time to restore and mitigate. It's going to be much faster.

(00:15:44):
But that also means is the reverse. When you push changes less frequently, you will have more unstable systems because when you push less frequency, you will have very, very large batch changes, which means you'll have a very high, very large blast radius, which means when you do have a resulting bug error, you will have to disentangle this big ball of mud and figure out which piece actually caused the error, figure all of that out. That ended up being a big surprise because, refer to my prior comment about ITIL and ITSM, if you're forcing a two-week pause for change approvals, you're causing this batching up of changes.

(00:16:36):
And sometimes people were waiting, "If two weeks is good, a month must be better, or three months must be better, or six months must be better." And I mean, just think about the merge conflicts you're causing, right. You're just causing so many challenges in figuring out how to push this code into production. So many people think of those four metrics, one, because we found that speed and stability move together, and two because we started publishing benchmarks on what this looks like for low, medium, high, and then elite performers for many times.

(00:17:06):
This, I believe, may have been interesting. I'm not sure if it was useful or helpful, but I think it was interesting because it gave people at least something to shoot for, something to aim for. I will definitely say what's most important is knowing where you are and the progress that you're making, right. It doesn't matter if, frankly, you're a high performer or you're an elite performer. It matters that where you are and you're making progress, right. Can you push daily or on demand, or is your only technical capability that you can push twice a year, right? Just know where you are, and is it a business decision or a technical capability? That's basically what it comes down to.

Lenny (00:17:47):
I'm going to jump in real quick just to highlight what you're talking... what you just said, which I think is extremely important and powerful, and people might kind of move on too quickly. I also want to ask you what actual benchmarks are, if you can share those, whatever you want to share there.

(00:18:01):
But before I ask that, essentially, what you're sharing right now is just I feel like the 64,000 dollar question of this episode is just how do I move faster as a team? And what I'm hearing is essentially it's ship smaller things is kind of at the core of it. And also, if we're... if quality is low, you're also saying the answer is ship more often, ship smaller things. Is that roughly the message?

Nicole Forsgren (00:18:26):
Yes, absolutely. It ends up being much, much safer.

Lenny (00:18:29):
Amazing. So I think that's an extremely important takeaway that I think people would... I don't know. That's surprising to me to hear that it's quality comes from shipping faster and then also to ship faster, and move... help your team move faster. It's ship smaller things and just deploys more often.

Nicole Forsgren (00:18:47):
Yep.

Lenny (00:18:48):
Amazing. Okay, great. I know we'll talk more about this, but let me go back to the question I was going to ask is-

Nicole Forsgren (00:18:53):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:18:55):
... are there benchmarks you can share just right now that you think would be useful to people? I know you said it was interesting and maybe not as useful to people as you mentioned.

Nicole Forsgren (00:19:00):
Yeah. So I will admit I only have the 2019 benchmarks top of mind. The team at Google has continued that work since I left. It's been led by Dr. Dustin Smith. Nathen Harvey continues the work, so huge shout out to that team. Many others participate. You can go to dora.dev and find all of the continued reports. They've integrated all of this work.

(00:19:26):
But I will say they've remained fairly consistent. So really quickly, I'll share the elite performance. So deployment frequency, you can deploy on-demand, lead time for changes takes less than a day. Time to restore is less than an hour, and your change fail rate is between zero and 15%.

Lenny (00:19:44):
Amazing. Okay, I'm writing these down. These are extremely valuable.

Nicole Forsgren (00:19:48):
And I will mention people will say, "Well, this is kind of a chunk of time, right. It's not super precise." Precision isn't really super important here, right. It doesn't really matter if your lead time is... If it's less than a day, it's less than a day, right. That's fine from a business perspective. It doesn't matter if it's four hours or four hours and two minutes.

Lenny (00:20:14):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (00:20:15):
Right. General categories are fine. Now I will say the next category for lead time for changes by the day is if lead time is between a day and a week.

Lenny (00:20:28):
And this is for good.

Nicole Forsgren (00:20:29):
For high between elite and high. Elite is less than a day, and high is between a day and a week. And then it goes between a week and a month and between a month and six months, right. So you can ask people, and they can tell you, right. They can kind of hunch it.

Lenny (00:20:44):
Mm-hmm. And this is from committing code into the repo and it going out into production.

Nicole Forsgren (00:20:51):
Mm-hmm. To about ring zero. So you don't... Don't worry if it's like, "Oh, well, now we need to think about the global deploy and which is the final endpoint." And it's like, how long does it take to get through your deployment pipeline? Because are you going to be surprised? Do you have fast feedback loops? How does your deployment pipeline work? Does your deployment pipeline work, right? Or are you going to commit code? Are you going to wait for that final review for about three months?

(00:21:27):
Is something going to happen or break? And when it comes back to the developer because something happened or broke because that kind of happens, are they going to have to insert themselves back in the code, re-review all the things that happened three months ago, all... so many other things happened that's incredibly difficult. Which to your prior question, this is how it relates to the developer experience. If something happened less than a day and it's a surprise, and it's not great, but whatever, something happened downstream, and I got to fix it, I'm still sitting in my code in my head.

(00:22:01):
I've got that mental model. I know what happened. Maybe it's not great, but it's fine. If it happened three months ago and I get interrupted. First of all, interruptions suck. That's not fun. Second of all, now I've got to re-remember, reread all of this code, maybe reload an entire new workspace and set up libraries and everything because I... maybe it's a whole quarter ago, and we thought we were done, and I got to do the whole thing all over.

Lenny (00:22:33):
If a listener is working at a startup, I imagine they're hearing this, and they're like, "Takes a day to ship that. We ship it all day, a thousand times a day." I imagine these benchmarks are more valuable for larger companies. Is there kind of buckets you think about for here's the size of company this is meant for? And then, do you think about anything differently for a startup, say, I don't know 10 people?

Nicole Forsgren (00:22:55):
If anyone is only listening to this? I just got the biggest smile because we saw no statistical significance between small companies and large companies. The only statistically significant difference was with retail. I'll come back to that. It's so funny because large companies would say, "Oh, but this isn't fair for us. We have more complex code bases. We have so many things to do. Small companies just don't have to deal with this." Small companies would come to me, and they would say, "Oh, but this isn't fair. Large companies have so much money. They have so many resources. They don't have to deal with all the things. This doesn't apply to me."

Lenny (00:23:30):
Wow.

Nicole Forsgren (00:23:30):
So it's either way. And on days when I was feeling real snarky, I'd be like, "Pick your excuse. You've got your dropdown." Now when I say, "Retail was a bit of an outlier," they had a statistically significant difference. Their difference was that they were actually better. Why? Now, I can't tell you why. I can... In a research paper, we'd have a discussion section, and this is where you get to guess. I would surmise, and we do this in the report, that it's probably because retail went through the retail apocalypse, right.

(00:24:09):
If you didn't survive, if you weren't just killing it, you did not survive. So many retail firms just did not make it through. You had to be at the top of your game. There was no such... Black Friday, there's no such thing as not having systems that are performing incredibly well. There's no such thing as not being in the cloud because if you cannot make it through bursting on demand, bursting like magic, sometimes I joke, right, you're not going to make it. And so I suspect if I were to guess, if you're not already a high performer in the retail space, natural selection got rid of you.

Lenny (00:24:53):
That is really interesting. That makes a lot of sense. So I'm looking at these thresholds again, and I'm thinking from the perspective of a founder who's just like, "I wish my engineering team would faster." Essentially you're saying if deploy times... if they deploy more than once a day if their deploy frequencies on demand or I think it was hourly was kind of the other bucket, was that part of it?

Nicole Forsgren (00:25:14):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:25:14):
Yeah. And then, their mean time to their fail rate is less than 10%, and their mean time to recovery is less than an hour. Basically you're doing great. That's kind of the message of this framework, at least.

Nicole Forsgren (00:25:29):
And if you're not doing it through brute force and killing yourself. Now can I jump in here, please? Because then people are like, "But how do I do this?" So let's say that you're not in that category, and you're like because this is the next... this is the piece of criticism I'll get about DORA, right. People are like, "Well, all you've done is make me feel bad. You gave me these metrics. You've judged me. Now I feel bad." And then I'm like, "So there's DORA there." I wrote a book called Accelerate, which is the first four years of the research compiled and put together and expanded in a few things.

(00:26:06):
And I'll joke, "There's a whole rest of the book, right." DORA is best known for the four metrics, but there's an entire research program supporting it. So it's not just these four metrics. What we find is that if you improve a set of capabilities... I loved your question around what is DevOps? DevOps is not a toolchain you buy. Marketing teams labeled toolchains DevOps because they wanted your money. DevOps is a set of capabilities. They're technical capabilities. They're architectural capabilities.

(00:26:34):
They're cultural capabilities. They are lean management practices that predict speed and stability. And then speed and stability gives you money, right, because it's your ability to create these features that give you money. So when you work backwards, if you want money, you get the features fast. If you want the features fast and stable, you do the things. And the things are technical capabilities like automated testing, CI/CD.

Lenny (00:27:04):
And CI/CD is continuous integration/continuous deployment, is that right?

Nicole Forsgren (00:27:08):
Yes. Mm-hmm. Trunk based development using a version control system, right. So do you have good technical practices? Do you have good architectural practices? Do you have a loosely coupled system? Are you using the cloud? Or if you're not in the cloud for whatever reason, are you using the underlying architectural pieces that enable good cloud to do the cloud, right? Or if you're in the cloud and you're not realizing benefits, is it because doing the cloud wrong, right? Do you have a good culture?

(00:27:48):
So you don't just magically go fast and have stability. So working backwards, which pieces are you struggling on? Now you kind of noted down the benchmarks. If you go to dora.dev, the team at Google was lovely. We worked really closely with the team, and they're keeping this updated. You can take a quick check. There's a button there that says, "Quick check." And you can plug in where you kind of think you are.

(00:28:13):
Like I said, you can hunch it, and it'll tell you where you are in the benchmarks today and what industry you're in. And then the cool part is it'll say... Now you'll want to ask yourself, "Where am I struggling?" But it'll say, "For your performance profile and for the industry that you're in, statistically over the last several years, these are probably your constraints, AKA, these are probably the things that you're struggling in right now." For people in finance who are high performers, they tend to struggle with these four things, whether it's like culture or continuous integration or whatever.

Lenny (00:28:54):
I love that you're getting tactical with how to actually improve these already, which is the bread and butter of this podcast.

Nicole Forsgren (00:28:54):
Mm-hmm.

Lenny (00:28:59):
And so we'll link to this quick check. [inaudible 00:29:02] dora.dev/quickcheck.

Nicole Forsgren (00:29:03):
And by the way, they do not collect your name. They do not collect your info. There's no lead, lead gen, anything. Everything's just there. And then, there's deep dives into every single one of the capabilities.

Lenny (00:29:15):
Amazing. And also your book talks about all these things. So people should go check out the book. Obviously it's on Amazon. Search Accelerate. Is that right?

Nicole Forsgren (00:29:22):
Yep.

Lenny (00:29:23):
Okay. So we were talking about DORA. This may be a good time to talk about SPACE, which I think is a different framework you recommend. What is that all about?

Nicole Forsgren (00:29:31):
Okay, so SPACE is a way to measure, we say productivity, developer productivity, but it's a little bit more than that. SPACE is a good way to measure any type of complex creative work. Now, how do they relate? Let's say you go through the quick check. It points out four things, and you decide you want to improve continuous integration and culture, right. Well, now you're like, "Cool, but how am I going to actually measure them?" This is where SPACE comes in because SPACE helps you figure out SPACE gives you a framework to pick the right metrics.

(00:30:12):
Now some people are like, "Well, SPACE you didn't give me the exact metrics." People love DORA because it's like, "Here's the exact four you need." Well, SPACE is like when you want to measure something that's complex, creative work, maybe like developer productivity. There's also an example at the bottom for incident management. When you have something you want to measure, it says, "Within your context, within the metrics you have available to you, here's how to pick."

(00:30:40):
That's what SPACE is good for. Now we called it SPACE because it stands for the five dimensions that you want to measure. So S is satisfaction and wellbeing. So satisfaction wellbeing is kind of self-explanatory. Now, some people might jump in here and say, "Oh, well, you're just touchy-feely." This actually matters because we find that satisfaction wellbeing ends up being incredibly highly correlated with all of the other dimensions of productivity and doing things well.

(00:31:09):
And as soon as satisfaction and wellbeing, things like sustainability, if you're satisfied, as soon as that starts falling off, other things start to break. So this can be an incredibly strong and important signal. P is performance. This is going to be the outcome of a process. So reliability within DORA, the MTTM or change fail rate. Those are both performance metrics.

Lenny (00:31:34):
And so you pick one to kind of measure as performance.

Nicole Forsgren (00:31:37):
Yep. A is activity. Anytime you have a count or a number of something. And these we see all the time because they're super easy to instrument and automate, right. Number of pull requests, number of check-ins, number of something, that's A. C is communication and collaboration. This can be how people work and talk together. It can be meetings. It can be collaboration. It can also be how our systems communicate together. It can be the searchability of a code base. And then ease efficiency and flow. So this is going to be the flow through the system.

(00:32:11):
It can be the time through the system. If we think about SRE or incident management, it can be the number of hops a ticket takes until it reaches the right person. Now, to use SPACE correctly, we want to use at least three dimensions at a time because that helps us balance. Turns out DORA is actually implementation of SPACE. So DORA would be SPACE for mostly that outer loop. So again, once you've found something that you want to improve, find the metrics that make sense to you, try to have them be in balance or intention so you don't throw something out of whack, but pick three.

Lenny (00:32:52):
So when you say DORA is an implementation of SPACE, one has five buckets, one has four. How do you actually think about that?

Nicole Forsgren (00:32:59):
So SPACE is there to help you think about how you want to pick metrics, right. So a lot of time I see people... So [inaudible 00:33:06] half step back. I used to advise people on how to pick metrics. For years people would pull me in to advise on DORA or Accelerate. They would ask me questions, but it ended up being metrics questions a lot. "How do I pick the right metrics to improve what I'm doing?" Like I said, they had the DORA numbers. They would pick their constraints, and they wanted to improve.

(00:33:29):
"But how do I improve? How do I measure this? How do I show improvement?" And so we would start thinking really critically about which metrics were the right metrics to pick. And I would always say make sure you pick balanced metrics. Make sure you pick metrics that are intention. And I could say it, but people have a hard time wrapping that around their heads because they kept picking things like number of lines of code, never picked number of lines of code.

Lenny (00:33:29):
Oh, wow.

Nicole Forsgren (00:33:58):
Number of... Still every month I get email about this.

Lenny (00:34:00):
Wow, [inaudible 00:34:00].

Nicole Forsgren (00:34:00):
Number of pull requests, number of commits. And I was like, "These are all activity metrics." And so finally I pulled a few of my friends together and I was like, "Let's come up with a framework to help people think about it." And so there are five broad categories, pick three because that will help force you through the mental exercise of, "What could I possibly pick?" You don't need all five, right. This isn't... We're not playing-

Lenny (00:34:00):
I see.

Nicole Forsgren (00:34:28):
... bingo. We're not playing blackout bingo. You don't need all of them but try to have at least three across different dimensions. Now one example here. I was working with a group that wanted to improve their pull requests very generally. They just said improve pull requests. So they were thinking about pinging someone every 15 minutes, and I was like, "Oh, this is going to be bad."

(00:34:48):
Because we know from other literature and research like nursing, you'll get alert fatigue, where people will just start tuning out alerts. Either they'll turn them off, or they will just stop hearing them. So number of alerts, right. They're like, "Let's just think about number of alerts." And I said, "Well, but if we think about efficiency and flow, how much time do you have to work on your coding?" So those two are balanced. So we need to protect time to work as well as code review time.

Lenny (00:35:25):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (00:35:25):
Like pull request time. And so, sometimes we can think about those, and then I think we added a satisfaction metric. Are you satisfied with the pull request process and the selection of the reviewer?

Lenny (00:35:39):
How do you go about actually capturing and measuring the say satisfaction?

Nicole Forsgren (00:35:43):
So for satisfaction, I would generally ask, right. Go ahead and ask now the ones that you instrument, you can instrument and pull out of systems all the time, right. Go ahead and grab that string. For satisfaction metric, I would only pull that periodically once every few months.

Lenny (00:36:01):
Like a survey to your engineering team.

Nicole Forsgren (00:36:02):
Like a survey. Yep, absolutely.

Lenny (00:36:04):
Awesome.

Nicole Forsgren (00:36:05):
And don't discount what people say, right. Sometimes I hear... Actually not sometimes. A lot of times, I hear people say, "Oh, but people lie." First of all, what is their incentive to lie? Why would they lie about having a bad system? Because it's bad, and they want it fixed, right. If it's absolutely a hostile work environment, they might lie and then tell you it's good. Then you have bigger problems, right. Also, do we ever see bad data from our systems or incomplete data from our systems? That's a lie, but we find ways to deal with it. We see it. We acknowledge it. We look for holes in our system data.

(00:36:46):
We try to deal with it, right. That's also a lie. So I think there are better ways to think about and deal with that and then try to work with it because and I wrote a paper with Mik Kersten on this several years ago on how data from people and data from systems are really important compliments because we can get certain insights from people that we'll never get from systems. Let's look at lead time from changes, for example, from commit to deploy. The speed might be fine, but people might tell you it's taking absolute heroics. It's some ridiculous Rube Goldberg machine.

Lenny (00:37:27):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (00:37:27):
The system will never tell you that. Or you could get data on your version control system. I worked with a company several years ago, and we found out that there was a significant portion of code that was just not going into any version control system. You're never going to find that out from your systems because it's not in the systems, and it was mission-critical.

Lenny (00:37:52):
I can see why people come to you asking for advice on metrics because you have this framework of, "Here's the type of metrics you want." And then I think, and especially from an engineering team, there's going to be this like, "How do I optimize and make sure I'm doing the right thing and measuring the right things." For someone that wants to do this, and an hour long podcast isn't going to give them all the answers, what do you recommend they go read or go do or look at to help them figure that out?

Nicole Forsgren (00:38:17):
One, I hate to be this person, but I'll point to a few of my papers. I will say I write things down because I get asked them so often, and I want to make sure it is broadly applicable or broadly available, I guess. This SPACE paper, for sure. It's an ACM, and I think the year we published, it was the most read paper at ACMQueue. Yeah. So we tried to make it as readable as possible. So the SPACE paper is nice because it outlines this framework and it gives examples of metrics in every single category. And so hopefully people can look at this and they can [inaudible 00:38:54], "Okay, here's an example to use here, right. Here are some of the things that I could possibly use."

(00:39:00):
And we're seeing that SPACE is being used lots and lots of different places. Another good one could be the paper that I mentioned with Mik Kersten, and it was about... we talked about using data from people and data from systems. We wrote it up in the DevOps context. I want to say this was written in 2016 or 2017 or something. But it helps you think through what types of data are good in which situations because you will never find yourself in a situation when you don't want both types of data. Even teams that I've worked with that are the most advanced. They have absolute instrumentation in every possible scenario.

(00:39:46):
In the most detailed way, they will still survey their developers at least once a year because you can get new insights, right. One book that I love. It's a little dense, but it's really interesting that I love is How to Measure Anything. And it's by Hubbard, and there are parts of it that are real stats heavy, but he has this portion in the front that's in covering intangibles. So it's like, what happens when you don't have data? You have no data. You're starting from nothing. What are good ways to hunch data? And I really love that because he covers some really good ground there.

Lenny (00:40:34):
Today's entire episode is brought to you by DX, a platform for measuring and improving developer productivity. DX is designed by the researchers behind frameworks such as DORA, SPACE, and DevX, including Nicole Forsgren, who is my guest for this very episode. If you've tried measuring developer productivity, you know that there are a lot of basic metrics out there and a lot of ways to do this wrong, and getting that full view of productivity is still really hard.

(00:40:59):
DX tackles this problem by combining qualitative and quantitative insights based on the very research Nicole and her team have done, giving you full clarity into how your developers are doing. DX is used by both startups and Fortune 500 companies, including companies like Twilio, Amplitude, eBay, Brex, Toast, Pfizer, and Procter & Gamble. To learn more about DX and get a demo of their product, visit their website at getdx.com/lenny. That's getdx.com/lenny. You also mentioned offline that you might be working on a book that will answer a lot of these questions. Is that something you're up for chatting about?

Nicole Forsgren (00:41:36):
Yeah, absolutely. So as I mentioned, I tend to write things down when I get asked questions on it a lot. And so this is one in particular. So we'll be covering... I'm starting to go through, and I'm covering some of these, and I think some of the important topics in particular are starting with what is your problem or what is your goal and being super, super crisp on it, right. What is it that we're trying to answer? And I would say this is a bigger challenge than most people recognize or realize.

(00:42:11):
I'm making this set up, right. 80% of the folks that I work with, this is their biggest problem. Even at executive levels, they'll ask their team, or teams will come back with uncertainty, and they'll say like, "Well, you told me to improve developer experience." I'm like, "Okay, great. What do you mean by that?" And then teams will have gone off for several months, and they're tackling something, and they'll come back, and they'll be like, "Oh, well, wasn't what I meant."

(00:42:38):
And I'm like, "Okay, what do you mean by this? Are you talking about inner and outer loop? Are you talking about friction? Are you talking about culture?" Because sometimes they're talking about culture. "And if you're talking about culture, this is an incredibly valid answer. But if you're talking about culture, this is totally different than if you're talking about friction in toolchains, right. And if you're on different pages, you're heading in completely different directions."

(00:43:05):
So that's one thing we cover, which seems obvious, but trust me, it's not. And then even how do you... We're going to do kind of a rough version of how do you start measuring from nothing and also the measurement journey, right. How do you think about the trade-offs between and the proportion of measurement between subjective data, right, data from people. So you have Azure interviews, and you have surveys and objective data, stuff you get from systems. Because when you first start off, you'll be relying much more on data from people.

(00:43:42):
You can get a relatively quickly. But as you kind of transition through this measurement journey, you'll get more and more data from your systems because it's scalable. It can be engineered. You can be doing much more with it. And also, you should be thinking about, "Don't let the perfect be the enemy of the good." So how do we think about this very, very strategically? How do we transition through this? How do we think about what each piece of data is for?

(00:44:09):
And also lots and lots of examples. So I have included example interview scripts. How do you select people? How do you screen people? Example survey scripts. What are some of the analyses we should do? And trying to make this incredibly accessible, so basically anyone can do this. So you do not need to be a data scientist, but if you have one on staff, you can hand them some of this and just let them run.

Lenny (00:44:32):
I think this book is going to do extremely well. Definitely come back on when it is out. I think you said maybe year-ish kind of timeframe?

Nicole Forsgren (00:44:39):
Yeah, probably about a year by the time we get-

Lenny (00:44:39):
Okay.

Nicole Forsgren (00:44:40):
... all the way through.

Lenny (00:44:41):
If people want to be notified when it's out, can they sign up on your site for newsletter or anything like that? Is there any way to be in the loop as it approaches?

Nicole Forsgren (00:44:49):
Oh, yeah, absolutely. Yeah, I'll add a link for that. Also, if anyone is doing some of this work now, if they have major questions that they would love to [inaudible 00:45:00] me to answer if they have success stories, if they have case studies, if they have anything that they would love to be included.

(00:45:08):
I remember when I wrote Accelerate before, there were a couple folks that reached out after, and they were like, "Oh, I wanted to have something included." Now I've learned. Today I've learned, right. If there's anything that folks would love to be in discussion with me about, I'm always eager to chat and nerd out about DevX and especially measurement and measurement journeys.

Lenny (00:45:28):
Awesome. I usually ask this at the end, and I have more questions, but while we're here, how would people reach out to you? What's the best way to contact you?

Nicole Forsgren (00:45:35):
On my website, I've got info.nicolefv@gmail [inaudible 00:45:40]-

Lenny (00:45:35):
Okay.

Nicole Forsgren (00:45:35):
Yeah.

Lenny (00:45:40):
Awesome. Okay, a few more questions.

Nicole Forsgren (00:45:42):
Awesome. Thanks.

Lenny (00:45:43):
What are the most common pitfalls that companies run into when they're trying to roll out any sort of developer experience, developer productivity, system measurements, improvements?

Nicole Forsgren (00:45:53):
I think one I just mentioned, right. Not being clear or not understanding what it is that they're looking for because then you can have a thousand flowers bloom, and everyone's kind of running in a different direction. I think another one is not pursuing this in both a top-down and a bottom-up structure, right. And I think that can really help drive success, and having good communication throughout is super, super important, right.

(00:46:26):
So getting your ICs bought in and helping them understand that this is for them. We want to understand what they're doing. Knowing what vocabulary they use, what terminology they use is super important. And then chatting with leaders and understanding what their motivations are or helping them understand what the motivations could be. This kind of hearkens back to one of our earliest chats on why I even got into this and how I see two different sides to the conversation on why is DevOps even a thing? Why should we even ship faster?

(00:47:03):
There are so many people that I talk to that are super passionate about DevX right now, and they're like, "How can I convince my executive team this is important?" Because their developers are just completely burning out, or they use computers and anger every day. And so it's like, "How can we have the right tools to socialize this to our leaders as well?" Because this should be a priority. This needs to be a strategic piece, and how can we help pull together the right value points to communicate this and to understand what their priorities are so that we can see how this fits in, right.

Lenny (00:47:43):
You've been working in this space for a long time, probably longer than anyone that has ever worked on this area of developer experience productivity. What have you seen change most from the time you started working in the space to today? What kind of progress has been made?

Nicole Forsgren (00:47:58):
We have these increasingly large complex systems, right. So 10 or 15 years ago, the internet was around, but things were really different. Now, almost every company has a really large complex system, right. We also have a shortage of developers, or at least a reported perceived shortage of developers. More companies are technology-driven, or at least they understand they're technology driven. It's like I understand a handful... I remember a handful of years ago when I met with a financial institution whose CTO insisted to me that he was not a tech company like that. That's not real anymore. That doesn't happen anymore, at least very, very rarely.

(00:48:39):
So all of these things come together, and suddenly, many more companies are like, "We have to be better at this." And that was not always the case five to 10 years ago. I used to have to really explain why this was a pressing concern and why it would continue to be a oppressing concern. And now, in the last six to nine to 12 months, we have this AI moment happening, and it just poured gas on top of everything because now what's important... We've always said that [inaudible 00:49:14] execution's important, but now this is absolutely true because it's not just about what it is that you build.

(00:49:23):
It's about creating absolutely novel, incredibly new experiences and doing them at a speed that no one has seen before. And the only way to do this is to have this software pipeline that is fast and is safe and is stable, and is reliable. And that's where we're seeing this really interesting convergence, and pressure isn't quite the right word, but it's really forcing the discussion and strategy and prioritization, right.

Lenny (00:50:07):
I'm glad you touched on AI. That was actually exactly where I was going to go next.

Nicole Forsgren (00:50:11):
Perfect.

Lenny (00:50:12):
Yeah, obviously productivity, AI, engineering, something that's top of mind for a lot of people. There's a lot of layoffs that have been happening. There's a lot of talk of we don't need as many engineers. I actually had dinner not too long ago with few, I'd say 10 X engineers, and those are folks that people sometimes say they don't need Copilot. They're not going to use any of these tools. They're already amazing. And they were the opposite.

(00:50:34):
They're like, "This is making me 100% more effective and efficient and I love it." So clearly good things are happening there. I don't know what the question is specifically, but I guess have you seen the impact of AI on engineering productivity? And has that shifted how you think about developer experience and productivity beyond what you already just shared?

Nicole Forsgren (00:50:54):
Absolutely. So yes and, right.

Lenny (00:50:57):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (00:50:57):
I think this is a super interesting open question. So can I answer it just with a whole bunch of questions?

Lenny (00:51:03):
Absolutely.

Nicole Forsgren (00:51:04):
We're absolutely seeing an impact, and we continue to explore this. So I have an interesting question to see how it'll change the SPACE framework. What's open here? I think a few things will remain, right? Satisfaction's still going to be there, performance is still going to be there, activity's still going to be there. How you communicate with people and with the tool efficiency and flow is still going to be there. I believe it will change and add a dimension like trust or reliability. How do I rely? Can I rely on it?

(00:51:35):
Will I have an over-reliance on it? And what we're seeing is that, probably unsurprisingly, people really fundamentally shift the way they work when they work with an AI-enabled tool like GitHub, Copilot, or Tabnine or others because now, instead of just writing code or having a short auto-complete, you spend more time reviewing code than writing code, right. There's this wonderful paper out that uses the Cups model. I'll share it with you. A team at MSR did it. Defines it, "About 50% of your time now is spent reviewing versus writing." But it'll be interesting to see how that changes things longitudinally, right.

(00:52:20):
Because other... Some of my colleagues also did a paper that showed that you can do certain tasks, like build an HTTP server 50% faster, but I don't think that's what productivity's about when you're using an AI tool, frankly. Anyone who's looking at that and dear CEOs or whoever who are like, "Now I can lay off half my workforce." That's not what this is about, right. It's not about taking a task and cutting your time in half because now what we've enabled is your ability to do certain things faster and then free up some of your cognitive space so that you can do harder things with this new co-pilot sidecar or something, right.

(00:53:03):
But also, because now you're accepting text and then reviewing it, we've changed what your mental model is. So we've changed the friction model that you expect. We've changed the cognitive load of what you expect. We're changing reliance on code. So what does this mean for reliance or overreliance? What does this mean for learning? What does this mean for novices versus experts? How do we measure productivity, right? There are a handful of us that are having these discussions on what does this mean and how do we communicate it thoughtfully?

(00:53:35):
Again, we really need to have these kind of holistic, balanced metrics because if it's an oversimplification, we really risk losing the forest for the trees, right. But it's also super interesting and super compelling, I think. How can we think about learning or onboarding to new code bases or new languages for folks who already know computational learning? I think it's also very different for folks who are just learning programming languages and don't already know things like computational thinking.

Lenny (00:54:05):
If someone was excited to kind of go down this road of, "We're going to focus on developer experience. We're going to focus on helping our engineers be more productive," what are the next step or two that they should take in your opinion just broadly knowing that you don't know any specifics about, say, the company that's thinking about this right now?

Nicole Forsgren (00:54:22):
I think if you're walking away from this podcast and you're like, "I'm already working on this, or I think this is a thing that's happening," I would say just go check your work basically, right. Has this been written down? Is there a clearly defined challenge, problem, something? Start there.

(00:54:45):
Absolutely because that is going to be the thing that reduces confusion the best, right. Absolutely. And then see if there's any data. And data can be very loosely defined, right. Is there any signal that is related to the problem? I'd start there. And you can do that. You can do that in a week. You can hunt something down.

Lenny (00:55:09):
Sounds like something you could do in a day.

Nicole Forsgren (00:55:10):
Yeah. Well, depending. Depending on how scattered things are.

Lenny (00:55:16):
Are there any companies that you look at as good models of, "They do this really well."

Nicole Forsgren (00:55:20):
I think Google does this incredibly well, and sometimes I hesitate to mention Google because they're like... some people are like, "Well, we can't be Google, and we aren't really advanced." But the thing I love about Google's approach is that they've really taken kind of this measurement phase approach to things, even when they roll it out in new places. They're very systematic in how they measure things.

(00:55:41):
They have incredible telemetry and tooling and instrumentation, and they continue to invest time in developer experience surveys and they triangulate them. And one thing that I also love being able to point out here is if there is ever a disagreement between the surveys and the instrumentation, which is incredibly advanced, almost every time, every that I've ever heard of the surveys are correct and not the instrumentation.

Lenny (00:56:11):
Amazing. I have just a couple more questions unrelated to this topic. Is there anything else that you thought you think would be useful to share or leave people with around this general space?

Nicole Forsgren (00:56:22):
I would say that thinking about what it is you want to do is always important, right. Like getting crisp, the ability to communicate clearly is always one of the best things. I think one of my superpowers and one of the things that I've been working with my teams on doing and kind of teaching them is, and one of the things that's really leveled up our work in general, is making your work incredibly accessible.

(00:56:49):
And accessible, not necessarily in the accessibility definition of the word, but making it very easy to understand what you're doing for your key audiences. And so thinking about doing that for anything that... anyone who's listening for all of your work is super important, right. So who is it that your audience is? What's their role? What words resonate with them? And then always being able to translate your work into a few sentences or a paragraph or left... or less.

Lenny (00:57:21):
I love it. A lot of the listeners of this podcast are product managers, and this is so core to the work of a PM, so I think this is [inaudible 00:57:28]-

Nicole Forsgren (00:57:28):
Perfect.

Lenny (00:57:29):
... speaking verily directly to a lot of the listeners. Okay. So just a couple more questions. Before this podcast, I asked you a few questions, including just like what are people asking you for advice often around, and are there any other frameworks that you find really useful? And so there's a couple of things I just want to touch on, see if there's something interesting there. The first is you have this framework that you call the four-box framework. I'm curious what that is and what it's all about.

Nicole Forsgren (00:57:53):
Yes. I love this four-box framework. I've used it for years. I actually pulled it out first when I was a professor, and I still to this day get LinkedIn messages from my students saying that it's like the most useful thing they've ever used. So here's what it is. I literally pull this out on napkins, at bars, at conferences to this day.

(00:58:12):
So here we go. Draw four boxes on a piece of paper, two on the top, two on the bottom. So they'll be kind of aligned. The first two to the left of them write the word words. And below them, write the word data and then between the two on the top, draw an arrow between them. So it'll say words, box, arrow, box, right. Is that making sense?

Lenny (00:58:12):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (00:58:42):
And then on the bottom it'll say data, box, arrow, box.

Lenny (00:58:46):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (00:58:47):
Okay. So on the top half, this is where, if you want to think about measuring something or testing something, you have to start with words. So as an example, let's just say, I think that customer satisfaction gets us more money or customer satisfaction gets us return customers. Let's do customer satisfaction. So the first box, you'll put customer satisfaction inside the box, and you'll put return customers in the second box. Now always start with words. You do not start with data. You always start with words.

(00:59:22):
And then you'll go around to a couple of people, stakeholders, managers, others, and you'll say, "Do you agree with this? Is this actually what we're doing?" And it can turn into a sentence. And then, in the boxes below it, this is your data. How are we going to measure customer satisfaction? It could be a survey.

(00:59:44):
And so this is where you'll go, and you'll say, "What data points do we have that could proxy for? What could be our data points for customer satisfaction?" And this is where it gets tricky. You could say, "Well, customer satisfaction could be return customers. But we think it leads to return customers, so we can't use that here." But return customers could be... So that's where you kind of roll this out. So how else would we measure customer satisfaction? I made this hard on myself.

Lenny (01:00:10):
Like a CSAT score or NPS score.

Nicole Forsgren (01:00:10):
CSAT. Yeah.

Lenny (01:00:10):
Yeah.

Nicole Forsgren (01:00:10):
CSAT, NPS.

Lenny (01:00:10):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (01:00:16):
We could say the amount of money that they spent. It's a stretch.

Lenny (01:00:20):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (01:00:21):
Okay. Now, return customers. Let's go to the next box. How are we going to measure return customers? Depending on our context, let's say that this is an online business. We could say that it's return customers as measured through the website. We could say that it's returned customers. We could just ask them, right. Maybe we have a follow-up survey. Return customers. Maybe we're going to do a stretch here. Maybe we say it's a referral link. This helps us get super clear on what it is we're going to measure. Now, the reason I like this is because if some of our... Now this data analysis. We'll just do correlations here, right.

(01:01:00):
If we have longitudinal overtime, that's fine. You can hand this to a data scientist. You can hand this to someone and you can say, "What data do we have? Let's go run this." If something here falls apart, now you can point to the data boxes, and we can get mad about the things in the data boxes, and we can say, "What's wrong? Is the data poor quality? Are we missing data? Was this a bad proxy?" Proxy stands in for something else. "Was this ridiculous?" One of the things I made up. It was just a bad idea.

(01:01:32):
Instead of getting mad at Lenny for his really stupid idea or getting mad at Nicole because this was a really bad idea, we can say, "This was problematic. What's wrong here?" Or we can go back up to the words at the top, and we can say, "This is not actually something that is probably going to hold, or this is not something we want to test right now, or this is something instead..." And it makes things incredibly clear. It helps you communicate what it is you want to do fairly quickly.

Lenny (01:02:04):
I love it. [inaudible 01:02:05].

Nicole Forsgren (01:02:05):
Now...

Lenny (01:02:06):
I'll check it out. It's ugly.

Nicole Forsgren (01:02:08):
Nice.

Lenny (01:02:08):
I'll Zoom in, right. Okay.

Nicole Forsgren (01:02:10):
Now I will say advanced mode. You can start with the same four-box framework and you can say, "What data do we have available? What do we think the relationships are?" But then you have to go back up to words and then say, "For these data points..." And we think that they represent something, and we think this is the relationship between them. "What do they represent? If I turn this into a sentence, what do they represent?"

(01:02:39):
And then you want to double check because spurious correlation's one of my favorite websites instead of charts. So you'll want to go chat with someone, interview, make sure things are actually right. But the challenge is I will see people run every correlation they could think of, but they haven't turned it into a word or a sentence that you can communicate to someone else.

(01:03:01):
They don't do the check, and they don't do that before... one, before running the correlations. And two, if it's there, right. All of our data is so interrelated that we quite often will find spurious correlations. But it can be really helpful just to have that laid out, even if it's just on a post-it, to say, "What are the things I expect to see? What is this actually testing? What relationship do I suspect is there?"

Lenny (01:03:27):
Mm-hmm. Amazing. There's actually... I have a newsletter post, a guest post on how to do a correlation analysis and a regression analysis so folks can [inaudible 01:03:36]-

Nicole Forsgren (01:03:36):
Awesome. Oh, that's so great.

Lenny (01:03:38):
... templates and plug and play, all kinds of... makes it easy for you. So what I'm take away from this is an awesome framework, especially for thinking about a hypothesis you may have. In this case, it's like, "Customer satisfaction's going to lead to more return customers. Here's how we're going to measure it." And then you basically run the test and see if it's true. And if it's not, maybe you need to pick different metrics. Maybe you need to pick a different conclusion.

Nicole Forsgren (01:03:59):
And within the DORA framework, we would say, "If we want to improve our speed and stability, we think improving build time would help. And then how would I measure build time?" These are the-

Lenny (01:03:59):
Makes them circle back.

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:10):
... data points that I have available to us. Yep, to circle back.

Lenny (01:04:13):
I love it. It's all connected. Okay. And then, last question. I asked you what advice people often ask you for, and you said that it's around making decisions. And I'm curious, what advice do you give people about making decisions?

Nicole Forsgren (01:04:28):
Yes. So this one comes up in business but also comes up personally and among my mentees. So many times, it starts with being very crisp about your objectives and definitions, but then it comes down to really clearly defining what your criteria is. What's important, and then among that criteria what's most important. Some of my friends know I have a decision-making spreadsheet that I have shared out with a handful of friends on should you take a job? Where should you move?

Lenny (01:05:03):
Wow, [inaudible 01:05:04]-

Nicole Forsgren (01:05:03):
What are the different things-

Lenny (01:05:04):
... really useful.

Nicole Forsgren (01:05:05):
... you should do. It is. Well, it's funny, though, because what's interesting is many times I will... I'll share it with someone, and I've got a couple that are just funny, right. But walking through the spreadsheet is often all you need to do in order to know what the decision is. And by that, I mean, so we walked through the decision. I had one where it was like, "Where should I move next, or what job should I take?" So when I started DORA, I did this. Starting DORA, I thought, was my lowest. Once I walked through the spreadsheet, it became my high. So what you do is you outline of all of your options. What do you want to do? And then you say, "What are the criteria that are important to me?" So if it's for a job, is it something like total comp, cash money, prestige, team, job predictability, work-life balance. Identify the criteria that are most important to you.

(01:06:02):
Now it's really interesting because sometimes I will only get that far when I'm working with someone I'm mentoring or coaching, and they will say, "I know what my answer is." We don't even get to the next step. But just identifying the criteria that are important is it... Now, when I was thinking about where I wanted to move next, it was proximity to an airport, the relative tech scene, the food scene. That was real high for me, a handful of things that was important. Now the next thing I do is, for each criteria, what's their relative weight, what's their importance? And I make it add up to 100%. And then I... This is the easy part, right. You just put it in a little spreadsheet, and then I give everything [inaudible 01:06:51] score, and I just multiply it out. Now this is where I'm data informed, and I'm not data driven.

Lenny (01:06:56):
Mm-hmm.

Nicole Forsgren (01:06:56):
There have been times I make a decision where the whole flip a coin and whatever it's... wherever it lands on, what your reaction is tells you what it should actually be. There have been times where I multiply it out, and then I'll actually fudge the numbers to get what I want, but it's still slightly off. That's per your data informed. Same thing in business. There are many times where you actually run the numbers, and it'll give you a class or a category of things, and then you choose. Now this is where one of my favorite quotes I heard somewhere about strategy comes into play and that's that, "The key to having a good strategy is knowing what not to do."

(01:07:40):
And the key to executing a good strategy is actually not doing it. So you can have many options, right. As a leader and as an executive, we have many options, and we only fund some of them. If you fund everything, things are going to fail. So being able to think through and identify what your criteria are, identifying that criteria, what's your selection criteria, what's your evaluative criteria, ranking them, and then deciding what the cutoff is is important. You can't fund everything. You don't get to pick everything.

Lenny (01:08:19):
Amazing. I love the spreadsheet idea. I've made versions of it, but it's always... I think, like you said, a lot of times, the exercise is just tell you what you already think and just gives you like-

Nicole Forsgren (01:08:28):
Yep.

Lenny (01:08:29):
"... All right, you're right. You probably should just do that thing you already thought you should do."

Nicole Forsgren (01:08:32):
Yep.

Lenny (01:08:33):
Have you thought about making a public template of this spreadsheet? Even though it is simple, I bet it would be really helpful to people.

Nicole Forsgren (01:08:39):
I have, and this actually might be a good forcing function. Maybe [inaudible 01:08:43]-

Lenny (01:08:42):
Okay, awesome. So if you do it, I'll put in the show notes. It'll probably be near the bottom at the end of the episode, but that'd be awesome.

Nicole Forsgren (01:08:50):
Perfect.

Lenny (01:08:50):
Is there anything else that you want to share before we get to our very exciting lightning round?

Nicole Forsgren (01:08:55):
No, I think that's it.

Lenny (01:08:56):
Well, welcome to our very exciting lightning round. I've got six questions for you. Are you ready?

Nicole Forsgren (01:09:01):
Absolutely.

Lenny (01:09:03):
All right. First question, what are two or three books that you've recommended most to other people?

Nicole Forsgren (01:09:08):
We actually had the perfect segue because the book I've recommended absolutely the most is called Good Strategy Bad Strategy by Richard Rumelt. Another one is Designing Your Life by Bill Burnett and Dave Abbott... Dave Evans. And the last one is probably Ender's Game, Orson Scott Card. No comment right now on some of his political commentary, but I used to have extra copies in my office when I was a professor and I would just hand it out to my students. It's a fun, just easy nonsense read, but...

Lenny (01:09:41):
I absolutely love it. Such a good pick. Haven't read in a long time. And are they making [inaudible 01:09:48] show of that at all? That'd be something.

Nicole Forsgren (01:09:49):
They made a movie, and I was afraid I wasn't going to like it, so I just didn't read it. I didn't want it to ruin the book, but at least Harrison Ford was in it.

Lenny (01:09:58):
Okay. I'm not going to check it out. They're making a movie of Three-Body Problem. I don't know if you've read that, but that is... I'm really excited for that.

Nicole Forsgren (01:10:03):
It's on my list.

Lenny (01:10:05):
Oh, man. Best sci-fi ever. Next question actually very correlated. What is a favorite recent movie or TV show?

Nicole Forsgren (01:10:13):
I think going through some real just easy, fun watches lately. I'm rewatching Suits again, but Ted Lasso is a favorite, and I just tore through Never Have I Ever, which is fun because John McEnroe narrates it, which is hilarious.

Lenny (01:10:30):
John McEnroe, the tennis player?

Nicole Forsgren (01:10:31):
Yeah. It's a riot. Yeah, it's so funny.

Lenny (01:10:35):
I love it. Next question, what's a favorite interview question that you like to ask people when you're interviewing them?

Nicole Forsgren (01:10:42):
I love questions that I can kind of spin around hard decisions that people have had to make and how they made them. I love hearing their thought process. And I get a little nervous when people just [inaudible 01:10:54] and shoot from the hip constantly.

Lenny (01:10:56):
So what is it you look for there that gives you a sense that they're someone you may want to hire or work with?

Nicole Forsgren (01:11:01):
I just hearing if they have some sort of process, right. If they have some kind of decision-making process, if they have criteria, if they have... How do they do evaluation?

Lenny (01:11:11):
What is a favorite product you've recently discovered that you love?

Nicole Forsgren (01:11:14):
I have a big one and a little one. My big one is probably Sleep Eight. So I live in Arizona. It gets hot here sometimes.

Lenny (01:11:21):
Oh, Eight Sleep.

Nicole Forsgren (01:11:23):
Or yeah, Eight Sleep. Yeah, the other way around.

Lenny (01:11:24):
Yeah.

Nicole Forsgren (01:11:25):
Yeah, so one's fun because it-

Lenny (01:11:27):
Cool.

Nicole Forsgren (01:11:27):
... it makes the bed cold and also gives me some data, which is probably a little bit off, but in the approximation's fun. And then Korean face masks. They're just fun. Yeah. And you can get some pretty good ones for just a couple dollars, and that's always fun. Self-care.

Lenny (01:11:44):
Wow. First mention of that one, of Korean face masks.

Nicole Forsgren (01:11:47):
Right. Listen, everyone get on board.

Lenny (01:11:50):
I just did the TikTok. There's a filter now where you could see how you look when you age, and I'm not happy with how it turned out. And so I might look into this.

Nicole Forsgren (01:12:00):
I had some basal cell cancer on my forehead a few years ago, and so I am much more careful with my skin, and you can get... One of my favorites is COSRX. You can get 10 for like $15. So it's fun to just chill at the end of the day with a good face mask.

Lenny (01:12:15):
I was going to ask you for a specific pick, and so we got one.

Nicole Forsgren (01:12:18):
Yep.

Lenny (01:12:19):
Amazing. This next question I ask everyone, and it's especially appropriate to you, but I don't know if you'll have an answer. What's something relatively minor you've changed in your product development process that has had a big impact on your team's ability to execute? And I feel like you have a big perspective on this, so I'm curious what you have as an answer.

Nicole Forsgren (01:12:38):
I think I alluded to this earlier. I would say that it's helping everyone. So I've done this before, but I think it's helping everyone to ask who's our audience and how will we share this now. And it's sort of interesting because, right now, I'm wearing two hats. One is at MSR, Microsoft Research. We lead very ambitious research, right. So like H2, H3.

Lenny (01:13:03):
I mean, what is H3? The third half?

Nicole Forsgren (01:13:06):
Oh, Horizon 3. And so it's-

Lenny (01:13:09):
Oh, Horizon 3. Oh, okay.

Nicole Forsgren (01:13:10):
... supposed to be five to 10 years out, which-

Lenny (01:13:10):
Got it.

Nicole Forsgren (01:13:12):
... right now is like, who even knows, right? [inaudible 01:13:14]-

Lenny (01:13:14):
And we're going to be in computers, living [inaudible 01:13:16]-

Nicole Forsgren (01:13:16):
Yeah. AI has completely upended how we kind of think of Horizons. And so when we're thinking really ambitiously and very, very, very forward-looking, what's our check-in? How do we evaluate this? And then how can we easily communicate it to our core audience? And so here, who's our audience, and how do we bring the far near?

(01:13:37):
And then for the other hat I'm wearing, I'm working with OCTO kind of across all of Microsoft to take a data-informed approach to really improve and uplevel our central developer infrastructure. And so, as we're thinking very, very tactically, what is our long-term vision, and how do we align with several of our broad stakeholders? And so there it's who's our audience, and how do we bring the near, far?

Lenny (01:14:04):
I love that. Final question. What is one tactical piece of advice that listeners can do this week to help improve their developer productivity or developer experience and move it in the right direction?

Nicole Forsgren (01:14:17):
If you walk away from this podcast right now, you could take a look at what's happening in your org today. Is it written down? Is it clear? Do you have any existing data and efforts? And if not, go find a handful of developers and ask them how they feel about their work tools and their work process and what the biggest barriers to their productivity are.

Lenny (01:14:41):
Also, pick up a copy of Accelerate on Amazon or your local retail establishment. Nicole, this was amazing. I think we're going to help a lot of companies move faster, have better and happier engineers, which is going to create infinite value in the world. Thank you so much for being here. Two final questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out, and how can listeners be useful to you?

Nicole Forsgren (01:15:02):
I am on Twitter and Bluesky, Nicolefv. And my website is nicolefv.com, and my... all my contact information is there. And as we mentioned previously, I'm working on a new project and a new book digging into exactly these ideas, right. How can we measure better? How can we improve? And what does that measurement process look like?

(01:15:24):
Both for kind of one time, really quick unofficial measurement pieces, and if we want to do kind of very formal longer term measurement pieces. So if anyone is interested in that or has any success stories they'd love to share, I would love to hear more about it. So please reach out and share. I'd love to hear more.

Lenny (01:15:44):
Awesome. Nicole, thank you again for being here.

Nicole Forsgren (01:15:47):
Okay, thank you Lenny.

Lenny (01:15:49):
Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

Will Larson (00:00:00):
I think that we often treat engineers a little bit like children instead of giving them the responsibilities and ability to actually thrive as adults. And so like, "Oh, the engineers won't want to do that work." Well, that's actually not good for the engineers to be sheltered from what is important. And so actually one of the, I think, highlights is that I think we're coming back this moment where we can actually treat engineers like our peers and put them into really senior leadership roles and not have this kind of baseline assumption of like, "Oh, we have to coddle them or hide them from the real problems." And this is how they're going to get the opportunity to grow as well.

Lenny (00:00:35):
Today, my guest is Will Larson, one of the most requested guests I've had on this podcast. Will is currently CTO at Carta. He's been a software engineering leader at Stripe, Uber, and Calm. He's the author of two essential books for all engineers, An Elegant Puzzle and Staff Engineer, and he's releasing his newest book The Engineering Executive's Primer in February of next year. He also publishes regularly on his blog at lethain.com, which is a must read for every engineer and eng leader.

(00:01:05):
In our conversation, Will shares advice on developing your engineering strategy and strategy in general, how to improve the relationship between an eng manager and a PM, how he finds time to write, while also working an intense full-time job, how he recommends approaching measuring engineering productivity, how to develop your company values, an amazing story about his time at Digg and so much more. Will is such a gem of a human and leader and I'm excited to bring you this episode. With that, I bring you Will Larson after a short word from our sponsor.

(00:01:39):
Today's episode is brought to you by DX, a platform for measuring and improving developer productivity. DX is designed by the researchers behind frameworks such as Dora, Space and DevEx. If you've tried measuring developer productivity, you know that there are a lot of basic metrics out there and a lot of ways to do this wrong. And getting that full view of productivity is still really hard. DX tackles this problem by combining qualitative and quantitative insights, giving you full clarity into how your developers are doing.

(00:02:07):
DX is used by both startups and Fortune 500 companies, including companies like Twilio, Amplitude, eBay, Brex, Toast, Pfizer, and Proctor and Gamble. To learn more about DX and get a demo of their product, visit their website at getdx.com/lenny. That's getdx.com/lenny.

(00:02:28):
Today's episode is brought to you by OneSchema, the embeddable CSV importer for SaaS. Customers always seem to want to give you their data in the messiest possible CSV file. And building a spreadsheet importer becomes a never ending sync for your engineering and support resources. You keep adding features to your spreadsheet importer, but customers keep running into issues. Six months later, you're fixing it. Another date conversion edge-case bug. Most tools aren't built for handling messy data, but OneSchema is. Companies like Scale AI and Pave are using OneSchema to make it fast and easy to launch delightful spreadsheet import experiences.

(00:03:02):
From embeddable CSV import to importing CSVs from an SFTP folder on a recurring basis. Spreadsheet import is such an awful experience in so many products. Customers get frustrated by useless messages like error online 53 and never end up getting started with your product. OneSchema intelligently corrects messy data so that your customers don't have to spend hours in Excel just to get started with your product. For listeners of this podcast, OneSchema is offering a $1,000 discount. Learn more at oneschema.co/lenny.

(00:03:36):
Will, thank you so much for being here and welcome to the podcast.

Will Larson (00:03:40):
Thank you so much. Super, super excited to be here.

Lenny (00:03:42):
So many people have suggested that I bring you on this podcast. You have a lot of fans out there and I am excited to be digging into engineering topics, which we don't do enough of on this podcast. So thank you for making time for this.

Will Larson (00:03:54):
No, thanks. I hope to be a good early engineering guest before you pivot entirely to engineering at some point in the future.

Lenny (00:04:04):
Wow, I love that. How cool would that be? I was an engineer actually when I started my career. How interesting would that be if we come full circle? Anyway, I thought it'd be fun to start with just what is changing in engineering? It feels like there's been a lot that has changed over the past few years, especially from kind of the ZIRP zero interest rate era to today's market, which is very different. What have you seen most change from an engineer's perspective and then just also what are you telling eng leaders about how to handle all this change?

Will Larson (00:04:32):
I think it's a pretty strange time in the market. So I think that I started working and right before the 2008 kind of crash. And so the first two years there were not so good. When I joined Yahoo, there was a layoff basically every four months. There was a layoff of some sort. It's pretty chaotic. But then we got into the last decade and it was just smooth. So numbers went up, revenue went up, headcount went up and people started learning how to build really large teams.

(00:05:02):
People started learning how to hire a lot. When I was at Uber, some days I would do six interviews back to back. I would just be in a conference room and at some point you can't even remember who you're talking to because you talk to so many people, one after another after another. You just have some scrambled notes you're trying to decode afterwards.

(00:05:20):
Pretty different now. A lot of engineering managers are spending half their time or more hiring 18 months ago and now they're doing two interviews a month or less. Maybe zero interviews a month. So there's a real shift in just the amount of time people are putting into hiring. Instead, all these different competencies that have become more critical or a really great engineering director might've just been spending their time hiring really well and that could be a top performer and now that person can't actually demonstrate what they're great at.

(00:05:51):
So that person might be perceived as a low performer if they're not also figuring out how to lead the team, getting deeper into the details and also sometimes getting into the figuring out what is the right allocation, what is the right sizing of the engineering teams, this is stuff that we weren't talking about much or maybe if you really pissed off the CEO, maybe an infrastructure you just grew a little bit slower next year, but different ballgame at this point where teams are actually disappearing, teams are getting cut down, teams are getting consolidated. And that's just something that we've avoided for that ZIRP era that now we become a core part of a lot of the job.

Lenny (00:06:27):
It feels like also engineers... They used to have a lot of leverage over companies, inside companies. I imagine that's also changing in a big way.

Will Larson (00:06:37):
I think that's true. I think this actually has been bad for engineers in some way. One of my hobby horses is that I think that we often treat engineers a little bit like children instead of giving them the responsibilities and ability to actually thrive as adults. And so like, "Oh, the engineers won't want to do that work."

(00:06:53):
Well, that's actually not good for the engineers to be sheltered from what is important. Actually one of the, I think ,highlights is that I think we're coming back this moment where we can actually treat engineers like our peers and put them into really senior leadership roles and not have this baseline assumption of like, "Oh, we have to coddle them or hide them from the real problems." And this is how they're going to get the opportunity to grow as well. That's a highlight for me and the shift recently.

Lenny (00:07:18):
I have definitely worked with that and experienced that where you don't want to piss off engineers. And so are you saying that because that's changing, leaders maybe don't have to worry as much about upsetting engineers plus you just generally think we shouldn't treat engineers that way?

Will Larson (00:07:33):
Yeah, I think a little bit of both, but I think there's been, in this previous era, where hiring and retention were one of the biggest ways you evaluated middle management. Losing team members was huge, huge issue. And so you started to coddle a little bit, which is actually bad, again, bad for the engineers, bad for the teams, bad for everyone, bad for efficiency of the organization. But now something that I love is we get to give engineers real hard problems and we get to actually hold them accountable. And that means we can put them in senior roles.

(00:08:07):
One of the things that I've been pushing on, I wrote my last book, Staff Engineer about what is the career path for senior engineers. One of the challenges is if we aren't comfortable holding engineers accountable because we just want to retain all the engineers, then we can't put them in senior roles. And so I think we're actually seeing a bit of a shift where we can actually hold them accountable, which means we can put them in senior roles, which means the engineers can actually get what they've been trying to get the entire time, but we haven't been able to because we've been coddling them a little bit too much.

Lenny (00:08:33):
Okay. So there's a few directions I want to go and I'm just going to poke around and see where we go. The first is you're a big advocate of systems thinking. We were chatting about this before. I think a lot of people have heard this term systems thinking and there's books about it. It's sounds great. I want to be a systems thinker. What does that actually mean? How do you find you apply it in your work? How do people get better at this way of thinking?

Will Larson (00:08:57):
A lot of the least successful but smartest people I've worked with were really strong systems thinking advocates. And so I do want to say every kind of framework has a lot of downsides. There's no framework that people can apply consistently, universally, and get good results. And so briefly on this one, what I see is often people will find a spot where their system and reality are in conflict and they'll be like, "Reality is wrong." And so what's a concrete example?

(00:09:28):
At Stripe, we worked on incident management. And so Stripe pretty important company where our API is available. If the API is down, you lose money and if you lose a lot of money, you leave Stripe because you're pretty upset about that. The number one thing businesses need to do is to collect money successfully for the service that they're selling, right? Stripe is super important.

(00:09:49):
And so we did a lot of analysis on incidents trying to understand why things weren't working, what we could do better, but we got so caught up in the analysis that we lost track of whether we're actually improving things. And it took us a while to figure that out because we were so stuck in the systems thinking model and it's not like, "Oh, the team was wrong." It's like, "I was wrong." I was caught up in that model myself, to realize like, "Hey, we weren't actually prioritizing improvements, we were just prioritizing measurement." And you can't keep measuring. There's measure twice, cut once. Sure, but you don't measure infinite times and never get to cut.

(00:10:25):
And you do have to cut at some point to actually make impact. But we just got caught a little bit there. I think a lot of people who get too far in systems thinking make the same mistake where they think reality is wrong and reality is never wrong. Reality is always right. Your model is always wrong if it's in conflict with reality. But that conflict, that gap is really interesting and that's where you can learn.

(00:10:49):
And so I had this model. It's really clean. It represents your hiring pipeline that moving through different steps. It represents your incidents and how you remediate incidents. It can model almost anything pretty quickly when you get good at it. And then understanding how reality is in conflict with that, you start to understand where your mental model is wrong and then you can go educate yourself and improve the model and just keep doing that.

(00:11:12):
At some point the model is close enough and you can stop doing that and go actually do the work. So that the biggest thing I tell people is this is a great way to learn, but you also have to do things. You can't just learn. That's not our entire job.

Lenny (00:11:25):
To make it a little more concrete, how would you best describe this idea of systems thinking? What's a good way to just like, "Okay. I get what you're talking about?"

Will Larson (00:11:32):
This is probably a better place to start versus a rambling anecdote about using it.

Lenny (00:11:38):
We can go backwards. It'll be great.

Will Larson (00:11:41):
Systems thinking is basically you try to think about stocks and flows. So stocks are things that accumulate and flows are kind of the movement from a stock to another thing. So what's a simple example of a stock? A stock could be the number of fish in a lake. A stock could be the number of people fishing in a lake. And so a flow between those two could be the number of fish in a lake will decrease at some rate based on the number of people fishing in that lake.

(00:12:08):
So if there's a ton of fishers, the stock of fish will go down faster. There's only a couple of fish, IT will go down slower. But also then there's these flows which kind of dictate that where if we've got much more efficient fishermen, the flow of fish out might go down, but also the fish do reproduce. So then there's another flow going back. So based on the current number of fish and the reproduction rate, the current number of fishers and their fishing rate, you start to see how these can evolve over time. And a lot of this.

(00:12:38):
So first always recommend Thinking In Systems by Donella Meadows. Really phenomenal book. And a lot of her work is also kind of referencing the work in Silent Spring by Rachel Carson, which talks about how small amount of carcinogens or something low in the ecosystem or the food chain rather as they get consumed by predators further and further up get concentrated. And that's a kind of a classic systems thinking problem to think about where you wouldn't think a small amount of carcinogens and a small fish actually matter. But as they go up the food chain, they start to concentrate it and an unexpected change can happen.

Lenny (00:13:14):
So then going back to your example of the hiring pipeline, let's come back to that to help connect this definition, which I've never heard, which is awesome, very clear to how you actually implemented say in hiring.

Will Larson (00:13:23):
The first thing to do is to get a model out there of any sort. And so you think about your stocks. And so in a hiring pipeline you might have potential candidates and this could be basically infinite, and then you have a couple of inflows. So you could have sourced, you could have outreach, you could have referrals, and then you have the candidates and those... How many people get sourced. There's probably a function of number of sources you have dedicated to a role. So you'd have another stock of how many sources you have and then that would impact the rate going from potential candidates to actual candidates you've sourced.

(00:13:59):
And then from candidates that you have in that box, you'd have a conversion rate for people who pass the first recruiter screen and that would move into step two of your process. And then from step two you have maybe a hiring manager screen and that would be another conversion rate. So you can see over time how the candidates of the infinite potential candidates like wandering around LinkedIn, posting about their deep thoughts, convert into actual people, your first, your second, your third.

(00:14:26):
But then as you get deeper into it, you start to actually see interesting things. And so for a lot of candidate or a lot of pipelines, the biggest issue is hiring managers don't want to extend any offers because the hiring managers can't get to confidence on any candidate. And you'll see in this pipeline, you'll see a ton of candidates getting to offer stage, but almost none of them converting from a potential offer to actually offer. And then you can say, "Hey, here's the problem. You need to go work with the recruiter and the hiring managers on getting conviction about who they should hire.

(00:14:56):
Classic problem with early managers, right? Here's a second problem. Manager wants to extend a ton of offers. They do extend them and none of them actually accept. And so that focuses you on the second problem. But there's a third potential world where actually you're just not getting enough candidates in. You're actually doing a great job of making decisions, great job of closing candidates. There's just not enough candidates coming in. And so by looking at this and you can build this model, then you can go to your applicant tracking system, a greenhouse or whatever and pull the historicals and you can just see how the historicals work versus how you'd expect it to work.

(00:15:32):
You can see the drop-offs and this helps you figure out where should you go try to fix things first. I think we've all worked in companies where you roll out big changes with no data behind them because like, "Oh, it feels like we're not hard enough in how we evaluate candidates or something." You go change a bunch of stuff. But often the real problem might be that the hiring managers making offer extensions to people who never passed the loop anyway. It's just the managers are issuing too many offers because they're panicking. And man, less true now, but a decade... Or not a decade, two years ago, hiring managers panicking to get offers out, that was a real thing that happened a lot. And this just helps you take a complex kind of abstract problem and turn it into something you can actually work in a systematic way.

Lenny (00:16:17):
I feel like product managers will either naturally do it things this way already because a lot of them think in funnels. And it's interesting to hear this version of it of this idea of just following the stock through the flow of the different steps. Awesome. Another thing that I know that you are very passionate about and spend a lot of time thinking about is engineering strategy. I think you have this kind of feeling like engineers don't think enough about the end strategy. Every other function has a strategy and engineers often don't. Talk about what you find there and what your advice is around that.

Will Larson (00:16:52):
First, I start to question whether any function has a strategy at most companies. My general experience is that there's very rarely a written strategy for any company. Sometimes it's a value statement. It's like we build the highest quality products and you're like, "Good. Okay. What do I do with that?" You're like, "Build a high quality product." You're like, "Okay. I don't don't know what that means."

(00:17:15):
Engineering often has this problem where I think people will make comments in their culture amp or their quarterly surveys or whatever. It's like, "Hey, the strategy is not clear or where's the engineering strategy?" And the biggest thing I tell people when they complain and then engineers complain about the product strategy. The PMs don't have any strategy or the business has no strategy. And the reality is product eng and business always have a strategy. It's just often not written down.

(00:17:45):
And so the first thing I want to do is I push people not to get caught up on the fact that there's no template out there, which is product strategy that someone has forked and filled in. It doesn't mean you don't have a strategy. You do have a strategy. It's maybe a little bit hard to articulate and maybe it's applied inconsistently across different layers of the product reporting chain because it's not written down. But it's never true that there's no product strategy. There's always a product strategy. Sometimes it's bad, but there's always one. And true for engineering as well. There's always an engineering strategy. Just sometimes it's bad.

(00:18:21):
The first rule of strategy is that if you write it down, then you can improve it. If it's not written down, it's hard to say if this PM is just not a good PM or if they're trying to apply the strategy that they've misunderstood or if they actually are correctly applying the strategy from the head of product that's just not appropriate to the problems they're working on, how do you debug any of that?

(00:18:43):
If you have a written document, even if it's not a super compelling strategy, at least you can start debugging. It's like, "Hey, the head of product should improve the clarity of this document. Hey, this DM actually isn't applying it correctly. Hey, the strategy actually isn't appropriate for this one business unit where it makes sense for the others."

(00:19:02):
So that's the first thing I think about. But the second big theme on strategy I think about is that often good strategy is so boring. It's hard to talk about. For example, on the engineering side of thing, a common strategy that's really good but very boring is we only use the tools we have today. So a lot of times you'll get engineers that want to introduce new programming languages, new databases, new cloud providers. And a really good strategy for almost all companies is like we just use the standard kit we already have today.

(00:19:39):
And at Carta, when I joined one of the engineers, Eric Vogel wrote the standard kit and that is our strategy of the tools we use. And you know what? Some people are really frustrated by that and I feel for them. It feels like they're losing control, but the power of these boring strategies is that it focuses people's energy on the problems that we value as a company. And so it is painful coming into alignment if you're kind of slightly misaligned over time, but boring strategies that tell you what actually matters and aligns you with what the company actually caress about are really good for you even if they're a little bit annoying at a time. And I can expand on this idea a lot, but I won't ramble indefinitely on it.

Lenny (00:20:21):
Well, maybe what might be helpful is what are some other examples of engineering strategies that you've seen just to give people even more just like, "Oh yeah, maybe this should be part of our strategy."

Will Larson (00:20:31):
So first, what is a definition of strategy? And the best one I've ever seen is from Richard Rumelt. He wrote Good Strategy, Bad Strategy.

Lenny (00:20:40):
He's coming on the podcast.

Will Larson (00:20:42):
Amazing. He also wrote, The Crux I think came out this year sometime, which I also read. I think both great and just a phenomenal thinker who has so much depth. I think one of the challenges of writing about strategy is you're like, I've seen two things and I write the book, but I think the thing that's impressive about Richard Rumelt is he's seen so many different scenarios that he's able to really operate from both the particular but also the general and dataset in a really interesting way. Another book with similar characteristics is How Big Things Get Done by... I forget the authors, but really amazing dataset of how mega projects kind of succeed and fail.

(00:21:21):
But anyway, Richard Rumelt, definition of strategy is basically three components. There's a diagnosis. What is the current status quo? What are the things that are real today? There are guiding policies which are basically based on the diagnoses, how do you want to address them? And there's actions. And actions are how are we going to implement these guiding policies. He talks a lot about actions because concerned about this idea of inert strategy where you have like, "We're going to deprecate our old product features we don't use, but no one deprecates any of them."

(00:21:52):
So he's really concerned about this non implementation kind of useless strategy that doesn't do anything. On engineering, I'm a little bit less worried about that. I think strategy is more interesting on engineering in terms of clarifying how we make future decisions. And so what are a few examples of that? At Uber, we only used our own data centers. We didn't use the cloud. And this has changed since the era I was there, but in the 2014 era, no cloud, and we had a strict no cloud policy. And this was annoying because we had to indent everything ourselves or run copies of everything ourselves.

(00:22:28):
But it also meant that we were able to spin up in China in literally three months and some surreal stories from that. We couldn't fit our racks into the data centers, so they had to take the roof off the data center and lift the racks in with the crane.

Lenny (00:22:43):
Holy shit.

Will Larson (00:22:43):
Just tons of stories and all this had done in three months and truly phenomenal. And Uber wasn't in China for very long, so in some ways you're like, we did all that just a leave? But they left with a nice stake of Didi Kuaidi and not a bad outcome overall. But I think that strategy, we run everything in data centers. We don't use the cloud, meant we were able to move in and out of different geopolitical constraints and companies that relied on cloud presence simply can't. There are fully constrained by where AWS or Google Cloud or Azure have built out. So that's one good example.

(00:23:21):
Another good example at Stripe was this idea of we run a Ruby monolith and that's what we did and that's evolved a bit since then. There's more Java and the Stripe of 2023 than there was in the stripe of 2016 or the 2012 or whatnot. But that policy really focused the engineers on building innovative features for our users rather than building different tooling to support different programming languages. And so in both cases, both the Uber policy around running our own data centers and the Stripe policy around Ruby monoliths, a lot of engineers hated these.

(00:24:02):
But the goal of good strategy is not to appease everyone. The goal of good strategy is to dictate how we invest the limited capacities we have or the limited capabilities we have into the problems we care about. And I think both of them were really effective towards that end.

Lenny (00:24:17):
A common theme across all these examples is essentially constraint, deciding we will constrain our options to move faster and focus on the things that really matter.

Will Larson (00:24:28):
In solving the constraints is to me, I think the most interesting thing that strategy really does, and I think when we talk about bad strategy usually is because the diagnosis is bad and it's usually because people are exerting what they want to be true on constraints where it's like, "Hey, we can do all of these projects at once." And often that's just not true, but it's hard to convince people that when they're the CEO or they are really committed to believing it, but almost all bad strategies basically come down from a willful disbelief of what an accurate diagnosis is, which means then your guiding policies are kind of incoherent to begin with.

Lenny (00:25:08):
Awesome. I'm excited for that episode of Richard where we're going to go real deep into strategy, but maybe just as a lasting topic around there, if someone listening wanted to get better at say end strategy specifically or a strategy in general, is there anything you recommend they do? Is it read these books? Is there anything else?

Will Larson (00:25:26):
If people want to get good at strategy, there's a lot of different types of strategy, but here are some things I'd really recommend. First, I think the Richard Rumelt book, I think Good Strategy, Bad Strategy is probably the right starting point. I think The Crux also quite good, but maybe I would read that one second. Great overview of how to think about strategy. Also Thinking in Systems, I mentioned that before related to systems thinking, a big part of strategy is being able to model the reality so we can improve your diagnosis.

(00:25:56):
So I think that one is really quite good as well. If you get into the engineering side of things, there's a lot of interesting books here. There's Technology Strategy Patterns by Evan Hewitt. There's The Value Flywheel effect by Anderson, McCann and O'Reilly. The Phoenix Project by Kim, Behr, Spafford, which is a modern rewrite of The Goal by Goldratt. But I think there's still the missing canonical book is kind of missing on this one. So I took a stab at strategy and my upcoming book, which is coming out the Engineering Executives Primer coming out early next year.

(00:26:33):
Also, took a stab at it. In staff engineer my previous book, but I still think there's a missing book here. So I am dreaming of writing an engineering strategy book for my next project, although we'll see if that actually comes together.

Lenny (00:26:48):
Well, let's actually follow that thread of writing something I was definitely hoping to chat about. You write a lot. You've written two, three, four-ish. You're writing a new book. How many books you've published? Two books and there's a third one coming up.

Will Larson (00:27:00):
So I have two books. First one with Stripe Press, the second one, self-published and the third one with the Riley coming out in two months effectively.

Lenny (00:27:08):
Okay. And then also many, many blog posts for many, many years. I asked a few people what to ask you, and this came up a lot, Gergely Orosz and Alex Xu from ‎ByteByteGo both asked just this question of just, "How do you make time to write as much as you do?" And then I also, I'll ask this too and just answer it either first or second, just what impact has writing had on your career? Why do you keep doing it?

Will Larson (00:27:37):
I feel really strongly that you can write a lot more if you write what you want to write. And so this is one of the reasons I don't write for financial gain and I don't write very much on a schedule, so I've done a few pieces for magazines, et cetera, but I find that actually really draining to be you have a topic, you have to agree on the topic. If a topic starts missing what you want to write about, you can't fix it a lot of the time and you're also on this deadline. You're like, "Ah, I'm screwing up. I need to ship this. It needs to be done tomorrow."

(00:28:12):
I just find that really draining. Conversely, when I own the schedule, when I get to write about, "Hey, I'm writing out something." So I started writing this infrastructure engineering book a couple of years ago. It just wasn't there. I just couldn't get it to come together and so I just stopped. I'm not writing it anymore. Maybe I'll come back to it at some point, but probably not.

(00:28:34):
To me, the biggest strength of writing what you want is you get to write where there's energy and you don't have to write where there's no energy, which takes you really, really negative. And this also ties into how I write books, which is that I basically write the entire thing before I start working with a publisher. And if you are, I think diligent and good at anticipating what their concerns are going to be, you can mostly reuse the content that you're trying to write. This is also easier in the sorts of books I write.

(00:29:05):
I think harder to do in a really technical introduction to MySQL or something, you can't just resequence those chapters and pretend it's going to work. Those chapters build in a different way than the sort of business book that I write does. Writing the stuff that's energizing and just giving up on the stuff that's not energizing, that's how I write a lot and how I've been writing for 16 some years. And the way I keep doing it is just by writing what's energizing and what I'm thinking about now.

(00:29:38):
I don't write what I'm not thinking about and I don't write for any audience, I just write what is interesting to me. And that means some people don't like it and that's great. That's totally fine. It's not really for them, it's for people who want to follow the ride and that's where I focus.

Lenny (00:29:57):
This episode is brought to you by Vanta, helping you streamline your security compliance to accelerate your growth. Thousands of fast-growing companies like Gusto, Qom, Quora, and Modern Treasury trust Vanta to help build scale, manage and demonstrate their security and compliance programs and get ready for audits in weeks, not months. By offering the most in-demand, security and privacy frameworks such as SOC 2, ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA and many more, Vanta helps companies obtain the reports they need to accelerate growth, build efficient compliance processes, mitigate risks to their businesses, and build trust with external stakeholders.

(00:30:34):
Over 5,000 fast-growing companies use Vanta to automate up to 90% of the work involved with SOC 2 and these other frameworks. For a limited time Lenny's podcast listeners get $1,000 off of Vanta. Go to vanta.com/lenny. That's vanta.com/lenny to learn more and to claim your discounts. Get started today.

(00:30:55):
Okay. There's a lot more I want to dig into here. How many posts have you written do you think over the 16 years?

Will Larson (00:31:00):
I would guess about a thousand. That would roughly be my assumption. I think there are a few years where I wrote hundreds of posts, and so if you do that like three years, it's not that hard to get to a thousand from there.

Lenny (00:31:16):
That's incredible, especially because you've had intense jobs for all of those years or most of those years. Very high pressure, fast growing hypergrowth companies. Somehow you find time to work. So first, let me just double click slash co-sign your advice here around paying attention to what gives you energy and working on things that you're actually curious about. This is exactly the advice I give to people. A lot of people start this full-time writer, creator life, and they're like, "What do people want? What do people want me to write about? What's popular? What's going to inspire go viral?"

(00:31:48):
And that's easy to do a couple times, but then you end up creating this job for yourself that you don't want. You don't want to be spending all your days writing about AI if you're not that excited by AI or whatever's hot these days. What I find is important is almost like 80, 90% of what you write has to be stuff you're excited about. And then maybe there's a bit of, "Here's what I know people really want. Here's what I know is going to do really well." Because otherwise you just burn out. You create a job for yourself that you don't want. Why would you do that?

Will Larson (00:32:13):
Yeah. I just a hundred percent agree with that. I think the other thing is that everyone converges on the same thing that they think people want. So it's crypto two years ago. It's like AI right now or it's counter AI. AI is going to ruin the world. It's hard to say something very novel because, one, everyone is trying to say something about it. Two, it's almost certainly not what you're that knowledgeable about where if you just stick in your lane, I think the biggest risk to writers is quitting.

(00:32:43):
A little bit like the 40-year career idea. The biggest risk to content creation of any sort is quitting soon because you get burned out. The biggest risk is not that you grow too slow initially. There's always this sense that you've missed the wave. It's too late to join Substack. The top writers are already there. You'll never be a top writer. It's too late to podcast. There's too many podcasts. You'll never make it. It's too late to join Medium. You'll never make it. There's too many Medium writers.

(00:33:11):
But it is just not true. If you just keep writing good stuff, you'll build an audience over time and you can take that audience from platform to platform. What really matters is finding something you can actually keep doing for the next decade. That's way harder than doing it for one year.

Lenny (00:33:25):
We have the same exact advice on this. This is exactly the things I tell everyone. When I joined Substack, I thought it was too late. I was like, "Man, it's over." And when I started this podcast like, "Oh man, there's a billion podcasts. How is it ever going to work?" So I so agree, and I also so agree on the fact that this whole thing is such a... It's a long game. There's a lot of people. I always say it's easy to start a newsletter, hard to keep it up. Nobody actually keeps it up because people are going to come and go. The thing that really separates success from failure is just people that can keep at it. There's not an end game to this. It's an infinite game and it's about being able to sustain that over the long term.

Will Larson (00:34:04):
You're not competing with other content creators. If you think of it as an infinite game, you're all working together. You can all help each other grow. There's no maximum number of product writers or thinkers who can be doing something. You're not less successful because [inaudible 00:34:22] exists or something like that. There's no competition there. It's like a false, false dichotomy.

Lenny (00:34:27):
Yeah. I totally agree with that. Unless there's so many and then all of a sudden what happens is the bar just gets higher, which is good because then people get better stuff and that's fine. That's happening anyway. Just the bar continues to increase because there's more and more content out there. And to me that's the ultimate thing you got to get right is just the bar. You just got to be at a high bar for anyone to care about anything you're writing about. And to your point, to do that well, you have to actually be excited about writing about it and have background and have something to contribute.

(00:34:59):
I'm just ranting here, but the way I think about this is you need to add something new to the conversation for anyone to pay attention because there's so much fluffy, superficial stuff. And to get anyone to care is you need to say something new that no one's heard before or share new information they haven't seen anywhere else.

Will Larson (00:35:15):
I totally agree. I could keep ranting about this for the entire time. I don't want to derail on this, but I totally agree.

Lenny (00:35:23):
We'll control ourselves. So then getting very tactical, I think this is what a lot of people are always wondering, how do you make time? What's your workflow? How do you make time for writing so that you keep at it with knowing you have an intense full-time job?

Will Larson (00:35:34):
I used to do things differently before I had a kid, so I have a three and a half year old and just timing your life just really shifts a lot once you have kids. But the biggest thing that I found is finding things to write about that also directly relate to what I'm working on. And this is where I can do something that helps me at work and helps me write at the same time because I think it's incredibly hard to find time to write about stuff that has nothing to do with your work.

(00:36:05):
And this distracts you from your work because these... Particularly if you're in a senior role, these can be pretty demanding jobs, but they're not demanding because you're responding to an urgent DM on Slack every five or six minutes. They're demanding because you need to make some really difficult decisions really well. And I think writing about related topics is a great way to refine your thinking and improve your performance. It's not like a conflict or you do one.

(00:36:34):
You either write or you do your job well. I think you can find a way to align. And so a lot of podcast folks do interviews with folks who are related to what they're thinking about at work, and that's a great way for them to learn, build their network, to refine their thinking, to test their thinking against experts in the field. It's not like in conflict with the work, it's in alignment. So that's one piece. But yeah, I've played around with my schedule a lot.

(00:36:58):
Before I had a kid, often Saturdays would be the writing day and so morning and early afternoon would just be writing. I can't do that anymore, so now I mostly write at night, which is tricky from an energy management perspective. But the biggest thing I would say is just if you're actually excited about something, you will find time and energy for it. If you're not excited about it and it's 9:00 PM, you're just going to get asleep. And so I really think that this is where you have to schedule a little bit deliberately, but the first thing we talked about around energy management, they really come together. When your schedule gets tight, if you're not energized, you just won't get it done. And why would you? It just doesn't make sense.

Lenny (00:37:41):
Just to close out this thread for someone that wants to do more writing knows that it's going to be valuable, but just hasn't any one tip that you would leave them with to get on this train?

Will Larson (00:37:51):
It depends why people want to write. I tell people, if you just want to write something that is going to help advance your career, you should really focus on writing two or three really good things and spend a ton of time drafting, revising, getting feedback. You just focus on making one great artifact or two or three great artifacts. You don't need to create a long-running blog where you publish every week. There's really no need to do that if your goal is just to create some artifacts that show you're a deep thinker, that help position you in the industry.

(00:38:21):
Don't start a newsletter if you just want to advance yourself in the industry a little bit. Just write two or three really good things. So that's the first thing I'd say. But if your goal is to write a lot consistently over time, my biggest advice would be just publish. And so there's a lot of people out there with stuff that hundreds of drafts and they've not published anything. And my thing is I publish almost everything I write. If there's something that I'm not going to publish, I don't start writing it because I have a quick check in my head like is this something I can write and publish?

(00:38:56):
And if my answer was like, "No, I just don't even start." And my accuracy has gotten higher over time as I've written more, but I published pretty much everything I write. That's why some of it is not that good. And that's okay. Again, I want to write. I want to get these ideas out. I want to show what I'm focused on and my evolution as a thinker trying to learn how to operate in these different roles in these different companies. I'm not writing trying to create a polished perfect thing, and also I'm not writing to maximize a reader's experience of reading it.

(00:39:27):
Some people don't like that, and I think that's a totally reasonable thing not to, but I think what I can bring you is my experience as an operator who's actively learning and thinking through. I think that's really valuable to other operators in the industry. In terms of giving you the perfect writing, I try to do that, closer to that. I don't know if I ever hit perfect writing, but that's where my books are. The books are taking a collection of thoughts over a couple of years, cleaning them up a little bit, packaging them. They're way higher quality than my typical writing.

(00:39:56):
But yeah, I would just publish a lot. Don't worry about the quality. Sometimes people will send you silly feedback and I just don't respond to that stuff anymore. You never know why people send you something like that. I think trying to debug people you don't know is a bad use of time. It's just kind of like, "Thank you. Move on to the next. Don't even spend time worrying about it."

Lenny (00:40:19):
I like that term debug people. I think people way overestimate how much anyone cares about what you put out. Most people are going to look at it for three seconds and be like, "Eh." That's the worst case scenario basically is just like, "I don't care about this." Not like, "Oh, Will is such a fool." What a dumb thing to say. Right? No one has time for that.

Will Larson (00:40:38):
And if they do, that's a them problem, right? The internet is a big place with a lot of people and there are people who are going to be having a really bad day when they encounter something you do and they're going to channel that anger at you or that frustration at you, but that's not about you. That's just like you happen to be there when they engage with it. You don't have to take that on. That's not your situation. It's okay.

Lenny (00:41:03):
Also, when you're just starting out, that's going to be the least stressful time to write because nobody knows it or sees it, so that's when it's like "Take all the crazy... Just do stuff." It only gets more stressful as you build an audience over time.

Will Larson (00:41:15):
Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely true.

Lenny (00:41:18):
Okay. Shifting topics. There's a lot of product managers that listen to this. Something PMs often wonder is how to have better relationships with their engineers, their eng managers. What advice could you give to product managers to build more productive happy relationships with their engineers and eng managers?

Will Larson (00:41:37):
So the core problem, and most of the EM PM peers that I've worked on... There's two core problems. So one, sometimes the incentives are misaligned and that's hard to navigate, but if you can just be honest with each other and understand the incentives, sometimes you can find a compromise, but sometimes the EMs and PMs will be misaligned because just their incentives are so far apart that there's no way to get to the bottom of it. And so this might be timeline related or saying yes to sales related. Or the engineer is like, "Hey, we definitely can't say yes to that." And the PMs are like, "Actually, we're going to say yes to it because really important for me getting promoted," or something like that.

(00:42:19):
Is it ever this simple? It's really never that simple. People create simplistic narratives to find villains that they work with. There are no villains in the workplace. They're just people with complex incentives that are doing complex things. But sometimes I talk to EMs who think, "Oh, the product manager is just saying yes because they want to get promoted because the salesperson will review their promotion or something."

(00:42:40):
The reality is never as simple. The reality is the business needs to sell stuff to remain functioning. You can't just say no and have the business succeed. That doesn't work either. So one, understanding the incentives. The other piece though, and I think this is the more common case or just that the EM or the PM just don't understand the other person's needs and they start arguing before understanding. So my biggest advice to both the EMs and the PMs, is before you try to solve the conflict, it's like pushing to ship this feature, pushing to change the approach. Just make sure you actually understand what they care about.

(00:43:17):
There is this idea that you have to make trade-offs and that there are tons of hard trade-offs to be made in the field, but my experience is if you really deeply understand what everyone wants, there's usually a compromised solution that gives everyone exactly what they want. That doesn't take more time. You just have to be willing to dig deeper into it and understand the true needs for each party, which is often not what they're saying by the way, which is part of the confusion.

Lenny (00:43:45):
On the incentives piece, is there anything you've seen work to fix that problem? Because if PM performance reviews are based on impact engineering, performance reviews are based on interesting projects or uptime, do you just work to change those ladder definitions? What actually can help that situation?

Will Larson (00:44:05):
So my biggest thing has been trying to force this idea that EM/PM pairs are peers and they generally have the same performance rating. And there's exceptions here. It could be the EM is clearly not performing and then it's not the PM's fault if the EM is can't show up to work. The team doesn't respect them. Sometimes there's clear non-performance, but generally hard situations are not situations where one person is obviously terrible. Those are easy to diagnose, those are the easy ones. But in cases where there's two folks who seem to be pretty good, but just the overall execution is not working out, I think this idea that same perf rating for both drives a level of one pain, but the right perspective.

(00:44:56):
Also, something that I think Carta has experimented a little bit with over time. Henry, our CEO has a blog post about trifectas in doing that, but not just for EM and for PM, but also for that business leadership as well where you all get graded the same score based on your ability to evaluate and solve for the entire set of constraints, not just your functional constraints.

Lenny (00:45:20):
Wow. That's so interesting. So your recommendation, something you're doing, it sounds like is the engineer manager and the PM get the same performance review rating? And so they're discussed in the same meeting.

Will Larson (00:45:33):
Our chief product officer, Vrushali and I spend a fair amount of time calibrating together and making sure... Again, there's cases where there's an exception because there's clear issues happening for someone. But on average that is what's happening. And I think people know that's what's happening because we told them that. And I think that's pretty powerful.

Lenny (00:45:55):
That is so interesting. I've never heard of that approach. That is definitely solving that problem of EM/PM or...

Will Larson (00:46:01):
Yeah, the incentives are shared now, which isn't perfect. It's still hard to balance them. They can still make the wrong trade-offs, but at least they understand the incentives are shared, which I think is a pretty powerful idea.

Lenny (00:46:15):
That is really interesting. I imagine some companies might even want to include design managers in that, take another step.

Will Larson (00:46:23):
The role and the primacy of different functions in different companies varies so much that it's hard to have a one size. You could also imagine where you want a staff engineer in that or not. And so I think very company specific. But yeah, I think design could absolutely be involved particularly for a design led company like an Airbnb or something like that.

Lenny (00:46:43):
Wow. So interesting. Maybe just as a final thought there, if a PM is having challenges with their EM, what do you think PMs maybe don't realize their engineering managers are finding important or maybe are stressed about that they're just like, "Oh wow, I never thought about that."

Will Larson (00:47:00):
I think one of the biggest challenges I've historically seen, particularly in the last decade is this idea that engineering managers have the job of giving their team interesting work. I think that that can put... You often see this in growth teams where the growth team is like, "Hey, we just need to do a ton of experiments." An engineer is like, "I want to build something brand new." And the eng managers in between those try to figure out, "Need to ship 50 experiments that are pretty boring and they want to do something brand new. I don't know how to do solve this."

(00:47:30):
So it's a tricky moment. And good EMs find the way to balance, but that's the biggest source of ongoing friction where the EMs have been told by their teams they need to do something that the PMs just have no visibility into. And it makes the EM seem totally unreliable partners because they're trying to solve these little bit of these invisible constraints. And that's where I think pushing further to understand, "Hey, you keep prioritizing this rewrite into a new programming language."

(00:48:00):
To me that seems like completely idiotic thing to be doing. What's going on? And then once you understand, you might not agree with them, but at least you can have an honest conversation about how to navigate those constraints versus just like, "Man, you won't believe what my EM partner did today. This bozo did blah, blah, blah." And having this victim villain mindset about your peers.

Lenny (00:48:24):
An adjacent topic that I wanted to spend some time on is measuring engineering velocity productivity. I think it's probably one of the most common and also maybe the most annoying questions eng leaders get is just how do I know if my engineers are moving as quickly as they can? How do we help them move faster? What advice do you give to eng leaders for eng teams just for how to measure productivity well?

Will Larson (00:48:44):
This is a question that's coming up even more in a moment when we're reducing a lot of the size of teams from the industry when the venture capitalists that are on the board for these venture-backed companies are pushing on the efficiency of engineering. Engineers are trying to figure out how do we represent this? How do we prove that we're appropriately productive for the amount of headcount and funding that we have as an organization?

(00:49:09):
And man, that's hard. So the first way that people focus on trying to answer these questions is just benchmarking by the amount of funding that you have. And that's pretty straightforward to do is a mechanical exercise. You get a data set from your venture capital funds or whatnot, and you figure out, "Okay. How much should we be spending in R&D? How much should we be spending in engineering? How much should we be sending on infrastructure engineering in R&D?" And you can benchmark this all out and figure out what the correct numbers are there.

(00:49:40):
The problem is this is a very mechanical and not very insightful, driven way. It'll get you a defensible answer. It's like the old, no one gets fired for buying IBM, which definitely hasn't been true in my career ever. But this idea that if you just have the right benchmarks, DCs won't judge you for spending too much in engineering, but this doesn't actually help you get to the right place. It just helps you get your board to be less angry at you, which is useful because it's hard to do good work when your board is angry at you.

(00:50:13):
But it's not useful in the sense that it doesn't actually help you run your organization effectively. So then there's the much harder mediator problem of how do you actually know if your R&D team or engineering team is effective? What I find is a couple of things. First, if you're a good leader and you talk to engineers, they will tell you... The engineers know if their teams are effective or not. And if they're not, they'll also tell you why not. And their diagnosis can be wrong, but there's a crumb you can start picking up and you can trace the crumbs to figure out what's wrong.

(00:50:49):
Often you'll have more experience to analyze the complaints to figure out what kind of the contributing causes are to them. But yeah, if you just go talk to the team on an ongoing basis, you'll know if they're effective or not and you can go work to solve those specific problems. But again, you can't tell your board, "Oh, it's fine. I talked to the teams that they're good." My intuition's spot on because how do they know if your intuition is good or not?

(00:51:17):
They're dealing with a huge portfolio and some of their leaders are talking to are good, and some of them have terrible intuition. How do they actually assess? I think it's tricky. What I've tried to do is basically two things. One, aligning engineering evaluation to the business and product goals. So I want us to be wholly accountable with the product goals. Well, we did a good job products like screwing up over there. Obviously, a lot of companies find comfort in doing that, but really we're here to support the product, to support our customers in doing something interesting. We're not here to build novel systems unless it supports the customer and the product.

(00:51:59):
So first try to align heavily there. Second, I think just showing the roadmap of the valuable things we've done in the last six months is really powerful. I think sometimes people are like, "I don't have anything to put there." And you're like, "Yeah, that's a real issue." Or if you have the ton of stuff to put there, that's great. I really find that if you just commit, show the number of meaningful, meaty things that have impact that you're doing and you can explain the impact, people will step back and give you space. If you can't populate that list, people will have concerns and rightly so, they should be concerned about that.

Lenny (00:52:36):
Is there any metrics or tools or anything like that that you find useful too? Because these are all awesome piece of advice, but I imagine everyone is always just like, "Give us this number we're tracking, give us this dashboard, see what engineers doing."

Will Larson (00:52:49):
So one of the most influential books in the last decade in software engineering leadership and infrastructure is Accelerate by Nicole Forsgren, Gene Kim, and I believe there's a third author on that one, but I'm forgetting right now. Really phenomenal book and it comes up with these four metrics. It comes up with lead time. It comes up with incident remediation time. It comes up with failure rate. And the fourth one of some sort. There's at least 50 different startups out there that are selling you dashboards that instrument these pieces of data and they want you to just evaluate your team on them.

(00:53:30):
The challenge is these are really good diagnosis metrics. And so hey, our deployments are slow. Why is that? How do we speed them up? But your deployments being slow doesn't make you a good company or a bad company, it just tells you where you should focus on improving. It doesn't actually change how you are. And similarly, if your lead time is quick or slow, it tells you where you should invest or it doesn't actually tell you if you should fire your engineers or something like that. That's way, way more details specific.

(00:54:00):
So people do like to see these metrics just like they see uptime metrics. A lot of engineers report on sprint points or stuff like that to their board, which are just totally, totally fake thing to be reporting on. But people get some comfort on it. So my biggest thing here is when people measure things, this isn't an engineering only problem, but when people measure, they take on the perspective of an expert and they can tell you why not to measure everything. They can tell you why every measure is wrong or inaccurate and they rule everything out and so they measure nothing and they go to someone who's not an expert and well actually there's no accurate measure to give.

(00:54:37):
They're not an expert is like you don't know what you're doing. And so you just have to get comfortable measuring something that's not perfect, but you can actually measure and reporting on it and then the measure that's imperfect as people ask questions, that's an opportunity to educate people on why the measure is imperfect. What are some things that misses or kind of the lies from the conversation.

(00:54:59):
Metrics are about educating the people consuming the metrics about the reality of the rich data underneath. They're not about this perfect data set that shows everything starting with something mediocre and the Dora metrics are really helpful for diagnosis, but if you have to, they can also be a good enough starting place to start reporting to your board or your CEO or to the other executives and then you're like, "Oh, there's all these problems with them."

(00:55:22):
Yes. There are all those problems with them, but that's this place you start and you educate people up from there to help them understand the nuances and that's how they become more sophisticated, understanding engineering, not by refusing to give them anything they can possibly measure.

Lenny (00:55:36):
Awesome. I'm glad that was your answer because we had Nicole on the podcast and she talked through Dora and all the frameworks that she recommends. And she even actually shared some benchmarks that she points people to that give you some sense of just like, "Are you in a good place roughly or not?" So we'll point people to that episode to dig deeper. Awesome. I'm glad that you're a fan.

(00:55:55):
Okay. Just a couple more questions before we get to our very exciting lightning round. One is around values, company values, org values. Do you have some really good advice for people for how to think about coming up with values? What do you share? What do you recommend to people that are trying to figure out what values they should define for their org and their company?

Will Larson (00:56:14):
I mean, values are really interesting, right? And different companies talk about values in different ways. I once worked at a company where the execs went to visit the Facebook campus. They saw the values written up on the wall and they took the Facebook values and wrote them up in our walls and that didn't do a whole lot. It maybe undermined people's confidence in the critical thinking of the executive team that just took these written up on Facebook walls and replicated it.

(00:56:39):
But I think those values did work well for Facebook and those values were meaningful for Facebook. And so first you can't do is just steal values. Value cargo culting. Users first. Great Amazon value. A lot of companies aren't users first and that's okay, but what's not okay is when you put, "Hey, we're users first," and then you actually show the decisions you're making and you clearly aren't users first.

(00:57:06):
So one of the things I think about is just honesty. And so good values have to be honest and so any value can be honest or there's no universally honest values. You can say something like, "We're thrifty." Or we can say something like we spend as much as we need to get the best value. Those are totally different and good companies are run both ways. So the first rule I think about a lot is honesty. You actually do what you claim you do and the value. The second one is applicability. You have to have value that you can actually figure out how to apply to your work.

(00:57:39):
And so one of Stripe's values was no longer a value I believe, but it's optimized globally. And so optimized globally is a really interesting problem because sometimes you'll have something you wanted for interesting value. Sometimes you want to do something and you're like, "Hey, I want to introduce a new programming language that's better for my team." For the organization overall, this is actually much worse for the organization so I'm not going to do it.

(00:58:03):
Uber didn't have this as a written value, but implicitly Uber's value was do what's good for your team and ignore everyone else because that will slow us down. So the two different companies had opposite values, but they're both very applicable. It's like how should we navigate decisions? Should I optimize for my team or for the organization? So those are applicable to real problems and they were honest where Uber was just like, "Don't worry about other people." Make it work for your team. And that's how they moved so fast because they just didn't worry.

Lenny (00:58:32):
Wasn't their value of toe-stepping, encouraging toe-stepping, something like that?

Will Larson (00:58:36):
Let builders build toe stepping. There were a number of values that could be interpreted in different ways and sometimes they got weaponized in various ways as all values do. But these are both interesting in different ways. And so number one is honest and two is applicable. Three is I think the last thing for a good value is this idea of reversibility. So there's some values that aren't actually usable. And so here's a good example. We build good software. Okay. But why would you ever not build good software? That doesn't make sense or we solve customer problems that matter. Good.

(00:59:22):
What company doesn't think they're solving customer problems that matter? And so there's certain values that just you can't apply. And so I think of these as identity values. These are really just you describing who you want to be or we care about our customers. Great. But who would say they don't care about that? There's certain values that I think of as just identity values and they're not wrong to have identity values, they just aren't very useful.

(00:59:51):
You can't actually use them for anything. And so I just always push people not to spend too much time on these because they feel good when you're an executive team debating what are these identity values? It's like we're kind to other people or sure that sounds good. We're a family. Sure, that sounds good. That one I guess is a little bit reversible. There's Netflix, which is like, "We're a team like a sports team. We're not a family." And so a little bit reversible, but not perfectly.

(01:00:20):
But yeah, these are the three that I found really useful for any value. Is it honest? Is it applicable? And can you reverse it? And if not, it's probably actually not helping the team make decisions.

Lenny (01:00:30):
These are great. It reminds me a lot of... I was there during Airbnb's period of coming up with values. Something that I would maybe add and maybe fits into one of these buckets is it needs to be clear who doesn't? There needs to be a group that doesn't quite fit because if everyone fits, you're not doing anything useful. What's the point? Which feels weird to say, why would not everyone fit in our big group of awesome company? But it's clear who is not a good fit, who doesn't belong basically. It's kind of like a cult a little bit like, "Who's not in our cult? Who doesn't belong?"

Will Larson (01:00:59):
But I agree. If it doesn't apply to anyone, then why bother saying it? It doesn't mean anything. And you could say it's actually the hiring filter where there are people who you've explicitly chosen not to hire because this wouldn't apply to them. Then I think it's useful because it helps you actually figure out who to bring in. But if it doesn't apply to anyone you're hiring or anyone that you have in the company, then it's just isn't worth having because you already have too many values. You are already trying to get rid of values because you have 17 and you need to get down to four where people can remember them. So if it doesn't apply to anyone, why bother having it at all?

Lenny (01:01:32):
Yeah. Integrity is a common one. Integrity. Everyone has that. Nobody wouldn't want integrity. What is unique?

Will Larson (01:01:38):
We're a non-integrity company. We're the company that thinks integrity is bad. That's not a real thing.

Lenny (01:01:45):
The other one I'll add to is honest. So Airbnb, we had six values initially. One of them was simplify and a year or two later everyone just realized we're not actually good at this. We want to simplify, but we're not great at this skill and values should describe who you are not who you want to be and aspire to be. So they cut two values including that one, and they're just like, "Let's just do these four because this is actually who we are. Let's be honest with ourselves."

(01:02:11):
Okay, final question. I wanted to visit Failure Corner, something that I've added recently to this podcast where people share a story of failure. And you have this amazing post about your experience with Digg and the rewrite that you all went through. I think it was the version four of Digg. Can you just tell that story and what happened? How much of a mess it ended up being?

Will Larson (01:02:33):
Yeah, Dig V4 is... I mean, it's still something I have a lot of fond memories for. There's one picture that I've kept and there's a picture of a lot of the engineers around this table in the middle of this giant office and they're serving sushi. We had waiters, caterers come in that day. They're serving sushi. They have plates with champagne flutes on it. There was a full bar and we're all around this table because the site is not up.

(01:03:03):
And so Digg before essentially what Kevin Rose or the board or some combination there realized is that Digg was losing to the social networks and that this idea of aggregated news was going to be outcompeted by the Twitters, the Facebooks, et cetera, if we didn't find a way to move to have a social component for it. It even outcompeted by Reddit longterm was kind of the fear. Although at the time that that was far from obvious. And so we needed to move to support social functionality and the previous version we simply couldn't get it to work.

(01:03:39):
So the decision that was done, I think two and a half years before I joined, and the shift about six months after I joined was they needed to do a complete rewrite in order to get there. This is a decision that never works out for anyone. So I think as someone with more experience, I could have predicted this wasn't going to work out. But I was earlier in my career. My PM counterpart at Yahoo, Das Kofinovsky. He went to Yahoo and he's like, "Come to Digg."

(01:04:10):
Worst case you'll make a couple hundred thousand in a year. Worst case. Probably really great outcome. Anyway, that's not what happened. The worst case was a little bit optimistic. So we go and the CEO got fired two days before I joined. So the current CEO left and then Kevin Rose came back for about six months, something like that. And we're just on the death march trying to get this thing out.

(01:04:37):
So we pushed really hard. This was before the cloud for the most part. So we wiped pretty much all of our existing servers to re-image them to the new software. We try to bring the site up and just keeps crashing. And so it basically takes us a month to get it fully functional again. And so that day sitting around that table with champagne and sushi, that's just like day one. And by 30 days in, most people aren't even trying to get the site back up anymore.

(01:05:08):
There's maybe five of us who are still trying. And we did. I think that was a really powerful moment for me. I think in the first two days myself and Rich Schumacher, one of the other engineers, we had to write a caching system from scratch, which got us half the way up. Really a terrible way to do software on a side note. I'm not recommending this to anyone. This was a series of anti-patterns kludged into a launch. But we got it partially up, but we had to restart it every 12 months.

(01:05:41):
Every 12 hours, every server had to be restarted even with the caching mechanism. And then about three weeks after that, I finally figured out what the core bug was, that was bringing us down every 12 hours. It was this incredibly simple issue that had just been hard to debug, basically related to the way that Python initiates variables used as default parameters. It's something super silly and we just had someone who hadn't written Python before who was working on the API code, so they didn't realize it's gotcha.

(01:06:15):
Then no one else caught it when it was reviewed and it just took a long time to debug. It was such a non-obvious. It didn't break anything, it was just doing a lot of extra load on the servers. We finally figured it out and it was just really remarkable experience pulling through. And you know what? The company still went to zero. So we had this at launch. I think we did this heroic, heroic stretch to get it working.

(01:06:43):
A couple weeks after that, a new CEO came in, did a round of layoffs. This is back I think 2012. The team nine months after I started was down to 30 people from about a hundred and it went downhill from there, from a business perspective. But we launched a lot of functionality, has really learned just a tremendous amount. And it kind of shaped what I think about in terms of early in your career, getting learning and going into a company that is maybe having a rough time.

(01:07:15):
I became a manager two and a half years into my career. Basically running the entire engineering team there because everyone who had a lick of sense quit or got laid off, and it was just complete idiot me trying to be the manager for the engineering org, wasn't qualified and no one would've given me that job, but I was the only one dumb enough to take it at that point. I learned so much and I really the kernel that turned into my entire career where it was that opportunity, even though at the time it was pretty grim.

Lenny (01:07:49):
That's an amazing story. I feel like a lot of these experiences were in the moment, it's just like, "What is going on? This is so bad and hard," end up being the most interesting and looking back end up being the most biggest teaching experiences. The ones you like bond over with people you work with like Apple. It always comes to mind where it's just like Steve Jobs's joke, people like crazy and then they look back and that was the best moment in my career.

Will Larson (01:08:12):
You would never voluntarily take on a lot of these really challenging things, but sometimes when they show up, you're with a group of people you really respect, you love working with and you want to overcome together. And that's really powerful experience. Even if Uber China was similar where if someone had been like, "Hey, do you want to go work on this Uber China migration?" I would've been like, "Absolutely not." But no one asked. They're just like, "Get this done," and so we did. I think these things are pretty remarkable.

Lenny (01:08:39):
And just to be clear, so Digg was down for a month basically during this period? Is that...

Will Larson (01:08:43):
So it basically didn't work properly for much of the month. It was like read only was back up in about three days, but the vast majority of the actual user functionality just wasn't working properly for pretty much an entire month and it was not that good. I mean not great, but that wasn't the biggest problem Digg had at that point. But it was one of the biggest problems that had at that point and it wasn't a real sign of things likely to go well for us. But like I said, you learn from those and I'm really proud that we and the team got it working, got it running even if ultimately we still went to zero and ran out of money and kind of sold for parts.

Lenny (01:09:32):
Do you think Digg could have made it? There was a world where Digg would've been a hugely successful business or do you think it was just way too late and it's the wrong product?

Will Larson (01:09:39):
The thing that really killed Digg is the change. It wasn't SEO driven. So monetization was from ads. Well, many companies including Digg claimed that it was the first in kind of stream, in feed like advertising company where Twitter has ads within the tweets or Facebook does. But Digg did that before Facebook or Twitter really innovated the ad format. But the vast majority of monetization was on these... We call them permalink pages, which is page 40. Then article we crawled and the vast majority of traffic for that was driven by Google search. And so there was an SEO change, which really is the thing that started creating the urgency for us to launch this migration.

(01:10:20):
SEO changed, traffic started going down, monetization was driven by that. And so we were already on fire by the time we tried to launch this. But I do think that I still want something like what Digg was trying to become today. Social news based on like what my friends are actually reading and liking merged with a global index of similar users who are interested in similar topics. It's still a product that I think Google Reader has some kind of similar components to it.

(01:10:49):
These are both interesting products solving interesting problems that have not for whatever reason been successful as businesses. And I do think there's a gap there still, but there's a lot of people trying unsuccessfully to fill it and there must be a reason why people struggle to fill it despite so many people trying.

Lenny (01:11:06):
Awesome. Will, is there anything else you want to share or leave people with before we get to our very fast lightning round because I know you have to run in about five minutes?

Will Larson (01:11:16):
I think we've covered a lot of it. New book coming out. New book coming out in February, Engineering Executive's Primer, O'Reilly. But that's probably it.

Lenny (01:11:25):
Awesome. Where do people find that? I know it's on O'Reilly. You can look at a preview of it even today, right?

Will Larson (01:11:29):
Yeah. O'Reilly, you can see the early copy. You can order it on Amazon as well, but it won't be shipping until February.

Lenny (01:11:37):
Okay. And then just to be clear, who's this for? It's for engineering executives by the sound of it.

Will Larson (01:11:42):
It's for engineering executives, but more so like anyone who wants to be one, anyone who's trying to figure out how to work with an engineering executive. So I think if you are struggling to understand why your CTO keeps doing boneheaded things, or if you want to side manage them, you're the head of product and you can't get the CTO to stop complaining about the engineers need more interesting projects to work on, this might be useful for you too.

Lenny (01:12:04):
Amazing. Okay. Ready for the lightning round?

Will Larson (01:12:07):
Let's do it.

Lenny (01:12:08):
What are two or three books you've recommended most to other people?

Will Larson (01:12:11):
So I talked about Thinking in Systems and Primer. I talked about Good Strategy, Bad Strategy, but I'll give you a third one, which is Don't Think of an Elephant by George Lakoff. It's a really interesting book about framing things in conversations that has really changed how I communicate.

Lenny (01:12:24):
Amazing. Favorite recent movie or TV show you've really enjoyed?

Will Larson (01:12:28):
I don't watch much TV or many movies anymore, but something I do still watch is Top Chef with my wife. She's a Top Chef, super fan. And there's something just very relaxing from these formulaic structured shows where you kind of know what's going to happen. There's no real consequences that matter too much and just escaping from real life to these formulas can be pretty peaceful.

Lenny (01:12:50):
No one has ever mentioned Top Chef before, so that's fun. Do you have a favorite interview question that you like to ask candidates that you're interviewing for a job?

Will Larson (01:12:58):
A lot of my interviews now are trying to help people decide if they actually want to join a company. And so my favorite question I ask now is like, "Hey, we've really loved you. You're going to come through. I think you're going to get a lot of offers from other companies too. I bet you'll have three or four really compelling offers because you're a fantastic candidate. How are you going to figure out really specifically which of those options are right for you?"

(01:13:22):
I think it forces people to tell you what they want and then you tell them why you have that more than anyone else, and then you can actually pitch them on what matters versus pitching on things that don't.

Lenny (01:13:31):
Love that. Do you have a favorite life motto that you often come back to share with friends, find useful either in work or in life?

Will Larson (01:13:40):
No mottos, but I can think of two things I thought about a lot. At Uber is something I talk to people a lot because it was a challenging time for much of it. It was there's no way around, just through.And that was like, "Hey, we're not going to dodge around this. We're going to gut through it and we're going to get to the other side and then we're going to be there." What I think about a lot more now is, will anyone remember what we decided in six months? Because I think people stress out about a lot of decisions, but I increasingly believe most decisions people stress out about just aren't that important.

(01:14:11):
So I'm like, "Will anyone care in six months what we did here?" And the answer is no. Just do something reasonable and let's move on to the next more important thing.

Lenny (01:14:17):
I love that. You've done a lot of writing. Is there a piece that you've written that you feel like is underappreciated that no one really totally got and hasn't spread and you're like, "Ah, I'm so proud of that one"?

Will Larson (01:14:30):
Maybe the piece I'm most proud of from last year was Hard To Work With. So Hard To Work With is basically I see a lot of people who are incredibly talented, but they try to hold their peers to a high standard and then they're viewed as combative or difficult to work with. And this one comes from a core struggle of my early career where I kept trying. I thought I was holding people accountable and people were just like, "You suck to work with."

(01:14:58):
And I was like, "But I'm just trying to have a high standard. Isn't that what we want?" And talk about honest values. Every company is like, "We have high standards," and you're like, "Well, let's do it." And then they're like, "We don't have high standards here. You suck." So that one is one that really is so transformational to me, and I think it really hits some people hard because I think a lot of people really go their entire career without figuring this one out.

(01:15:20):
And they're some of the most talented, hardest working people you'll ever work with and can't quite land this one idea that's holding them back. And they care so much and they are often despised because they care so much. I think this is one that I hope more people will read over times and there's a really important lesson for me in there.

Lenny (01:15:42):
Well, we will link to it in the show notes and help more people discover it. Two last questions. Where can folks find you online if they want to reach out and maybe follow up on questions? And how can listeners be useful to you?

Will Larson (01:15:51):
So find me online, lethain.com, lethain.com. All my writing, my books, everything links linked there. And the biggest thing that I'm thinking about right now is just strategy. So really curious for folks who are thinking about strategy, who think they've done product, business, or engineering strategy well. Would love to hear from folks what they're thinking about, what's actually worked and maybe what are the lies that have not turned out to work that they thought might work earlier in their journey.

Lenny (01:16:19):
Amazing. Will, thank you so much for being here.

Will Larson (01:16:23):
Thank you so much. This is really fantastic.

Lenny (01:16:25):
Same for me. Bye, everyone. Thank you so much for listening. If you found this valuable, you can subscribe to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or your favorite podcast app. Also, please consider giving us a rating or leaving a review as that really helps other listeners find the podcast. You can find all past episodes or learn more about the show at lennyspodcast.com. See you in the next episode.

